A P p· E N DIX:

Concerning the Divine Law.r. ,

SECT. I.

Why Go'tl made Laws -when he /mt'IJ) that thf1
would not be o"flrvtd.

I.THE Divine Laws are either those which
God has implanted in the Nature of every
Being, or those which he has published to Mankind
in a particular manner, by certain Me.ff engers chosen
and sent for this Pt19'°k· For since a I.Aw is the
Will of a Superior fu.Jftciently promulged to an Inferior,
and '"tended with the Hope or Fear of Reward or
funijliment : 'tis plain that God may be conceived
to have made this Declaration of his Will to his
Creatures two ways: Firft, by giving them such
a Nature as requires that some ·things be done, and
others avoided, in order to it's Preservation : those
things which am made known to us i~ this manner,
are commapded or forbidden, w~ fay, by the Law
of Nature: and that Law which thu~ discovers
itself to our U nderstandina we look upon as the
Will of God promulged to his Crea~res : For we
are "very certain that God according to. his Goodnefs,
wills the Good and Preservation of all things.
which he himself has made, as far as is possible :
and consequently hates any thing that is hurtsul tQ
the Creature.

II. Now it must be observed that thcfe natural
Laws are either Universal or Particular; and 'tis fit
the particular ones should give way to the more Uni-
. · versala
:...
l'crfal, and those of ldS Moment to the more im".'
portant. For instanee, 'tis of the Nature of Body
~at it be capable of Motion, that it be frapped and
~roken in Pieces by meeting . with others in Motipn,
and this is the Universal Law of Bodies. But
it is of the Nature of an Animal to preserve itself,
;md use its utmost Epdeayour that the Parts of i~
Body be not separated or dissolved, and this is the
particular uw of Animals. .

· Now fmce these Laws aresometimes ineonsistent,
it is reasonable thl!-t the latter, as being a particular
one and of less Consequenee, 1hould yield to the
former : and this is evidently the Will of God. If
it be ask.ed, Why did God make Laws which in
some respect intersere with one another? I answer,
~ before, That this could not be avoided without
~ greater Evil: Since theresore of two Evils the
less is to be chosen, God will'd that particular
Laws and those of less consequenee, should give
place to the µiore Universal and those of greater
Jmportance; rather than remove that Ineonsistency,
~ere arifmg less Ineonvenience ~o Nature fro111
thence.

· III. The fame µiuft be said of those Laws which '
relate to Morality. 'Tis the U niversal Law of 1
Free Agents, that ·they 1hall please themselyes by :
Election, but there are some things eligible which 1
µiay be prejudicial to some particular' Beings. Now ,
· it is better, as was said before, that Particulars be l
injured, than that the U niversal Law of Free Agents ~
~ violated. We must suppose then that God will~
d this as the less Evil of the two. Men are permitted
theresore to abuse their Free Will, and 'tis
pccessmissionary that God 1hould tolerate either this Ineonvenience
or a greater. But it is not at all necessii.ry
fhat Man should make an Evil Choice ; theresore he
alone is saulty ; for it proceeds from his Act that
~ is reduced to a necefiity of choofmg the least
.~ong many Evils. ·
•• : .;. i . IV.

IV. From hence it appears that all the Laws of'
Nature are always observed according to the Will
and Intent of God. For he wilied that the particu ...
lar fuould give place to the General ones, and that
Maa should fin rather than be driven from Sin by
force. You'll fay, why theil is he angry at Sinners,
fmce nothing is done against his Will ? I an ...
f wer: When Anger is attributed to God, 'tis after
the manner of Men ; • whereas it is orde~
and essected by the very Nature and Conftitution
of things, that whoever does any thing in oppofi.,.
r:ion to any Law of Nature, though it be a partirular
one, shall bring some Ineonvenience upon himself.
By which contrivanee God has taken 'care that the
very least law should not be violated raslily and
without N ecessity. When an Offender theresore,
who willingly breaks a particular Law, brings ccr ..
tain Mifery upon himself, God who wifely coupled
these together, is said to be angry: Because a Man
in Anger would not take any other or more esseetual
Revenge on the Perfon that proyoked him ;
and the Evil which naturally attends a bad Elecaon
is to be esteemed a Punifhmept institted as it were
by an apgry God.

V. As to the second fort of DiVine Laws, 'lliz.
the Pojitive; 'tis certain that God, who.is the Au-
: thor of Nature and established the Laws of it, can
either alter them or add to them when he fees it
proper. Neither does he want Means, whenever
he pleases, to affiire Mankind that he will do it.
When theresore we find any Aiteration in the
1 Laws of Nature, we may from hence conclude
that God demands our Attention. And hereupon
we esteem the Promulgation of a new Law rel
commended to us by this Token to be an authentic
Declaration of the Will of God. In this manner
were the Mofaic and Evangtli& Laws~~;
'lJi~. by Miractes,
. YJ.

VI. But it is utually asked, Why d'.fd God establi1h
and promulge those Laws· which he knew
Men woul~ not observe ? It must be anf wered, '
That these Laws are Means of acquainting Free
Agents wjth what is expectie~t for them, and of ·
moving them to the choice of it. Neither does
their Nature admit of any that are more effieaci• ,
ous : for it is such as must be persuacted and not
compelied. Notwithstanding theresore God knew
that his Laws would. not be observed by all, yet he
proposes them ~o all, for J:>y this Means a great
inany learn their true Interect~ thanksully embrace
the Laws and obey them ; and the reft are nG
worse for them, since they would be inve>lved iR
the fame Evils which they feel from the Sanction
of the Laws, and perhaps greater; though these Laws
had never been. (85.)

'N O'T ES.
. (Ss.) "l'is a very ukflll Observation which our Autliot malte'i
in chis place. and illustrates in the following Section, par. J·
ivi:r.. that the Divine Laws (especially those o( the Chri/lia'tl
Difpensation) ate chiesly D1c/arations of the natural and ne:..
tessmissionary Effi:fls of S~n, or Diniliom aria M1a111 to avoid them;
which necefi"missionary ruteas ·are conceived to be the real Sa110io1z
of these Laws. Consequently these Laws cannot properlt
'liring us into a worse State than we fbould have been in without
them. - They do not introduce a new Train of arbitrmissionary
and additional Evils. but on the contrmissionary are de1igned in pure
Goodnefs to lefi"en the Npergamumber of the old oness - to forc!wam
us of the natural Consequenees of our own Aas and
Habits, arid prevent those Moral Evils to which we are expo(-
. Cd by the very ~onftitution of _our Bein,&s; - whic~ the universal
Law of Liberty makes 1t possible for us to mcur, and
fmpossible for GOd to hinder by any other means, as has been
shewn above. Farther ; this Notfon, that most of the Mifery
both in this World and the next is the· ""t.ffmissionary CmftfJutrre.
cf sinsul Atlions a~ording to the fixed Laws of Nature, rather
~han any positive Panitliment immediately inflitie"d by die De-
' ity, will, I am apt to' think, h"ave the greatest InAuence on
most Men to deter them from Cuch Ashons. I am fore I fidd
myself more deeply aff'e&d with this Ressea.ion that Mifery
will follow ·ef Courie apon some certain Praa,ices, and that by
Didul&ing them I naturally and ncccfi"arily destroy m1fc:lf, than.
~

But pnting that .fpergamume who transgreis the Laws
meet with greater and more Ineonveniencics than
they would have done without them, 'tis better that
some should suffer Ineonveniencies thro' their own
sault, than that all should be deprived of the Benefit
of the Divine Laws ; God theresore out of infinita
Goodnefs, which is always inclined to the belt;
promulgcd those Laws which he knew all Mea
would not observe.
S~CT.

'NOTES.

j lhould be by a Profpea of the very fame Degree of Pain
threatned as a Punisliment for such Praaices. And the Rea~
Ion of this is evident: I am apt still to hope that the latter mat
possibly be remitted ; but the former leaves no i'OOm for Hope.
Again. A due attention to this Do&ine that all our moral ·
Happinef, in this World must bcof our own making, and that
clifordered, Eril AfFeaions, irregular and perverse Habies, &e;
will constitute a Jreat part of our Hill, in the next, (which
mi&ht be shewn 1n the fame manner as was hinted coneerning
virtuous Habits, in Note 79. hut is rendered unneedsmissionary by
the Authors there mentioned.) This Doarine, I fay, if right.;
ly understood and applied, would discover the weakness of all.
such pretences to Safvation as are built upon the bare Belief
of, or Confidenee in what any other has done or can do for
111 ; or even of what we do ourselyes purely by way of Op11I
Oµrat11111, i. e. as ultimately relying on the bare Difcharge of
any Duty, and not ufmg and applying it as a means to Tome
sarther End, "'·l· on Prll)tr, as the mere Labour of the Lips:
C>n the S11trt11111nt as a Charm ; on R9eniat1t1 as a· limple Alt
entitlin1 as to Happinefs ; in short, on any thiag which doe'
not enter the Heart .and improve the Temper. If Heaven ha
not fo much the Reward of Reli~ion, as the 1kll11ral Cmft·
f""'" of .a r~HJious Frame of Mi~~ and <Vitt 'Vtrfo i tlich
JJow abfutd is it for us who are aspinng after that State, t~
stop by the way, to reft in any particular Aas of Religion al
arbitrmissionary Iastitutions procuring; aud as it were pimhafitzg it
f'or ue, instead of using them aa, w.hat they really are. fit ln~
uD)enta to 'UIOt'i Olll oar own Salvation by prodatiirg thij
frame of Mind in us i as proper Helps and Affistanees enablini
ua to atj11ir1 this Heavenly Te111per ? And on the other Side';
llow vain mull be our Hop.cs of escaping Hell by any fueli
Methodt as these, if we·still carry our Hell within us l ·
• 'Ib1 Mi'111 ii it' 1 tJ1W• P lati, au is itst!f
Cati •au a IUa'll'• If JUI/, a H11/ -f' JUn'•,:
tu Par.11. of t!H fohinz S111~
. 3

SECT. II.

Coneerning Divine Rewards and Punijliments.

I.J T · was proper to fay something coneerning
these, fmce Puni1hmcnt is a natural Evil, 'Ufa. 1
Pain, Difappointment of Appetite,, or Damage an- 1
nexed to a wrong Choice,, by a Foresight whereof ~
we might be deterred from ma.king a wrong Choice. 1
In theie consists the Power and Efficacy of Laws, •
nor would they be of any force without them. Now I
Good or Evil, i. e. Rewards and PunHliments, inay 1
be annexed, either by Nature,, or by Laws of positive
lnftitution.

II. As to Natttre, all Evil is prejudicial to it, I
i. e. interrupts its Course : Evil theresore proceeds '
from some Violenee done ·to Nature, and that ~
which offers Violenee must necessarily suffer it ; :
for every natural .Aaion has Re-atl:ion joined with •
it. . According to the La.ws of Mechanism then
Evil done to another is for the most part repayed •
with Evil to the Doer, i. e. with Punisliment. By,
which piece of Machinery or Contrivanee God has 1
manisested both his Wifdbm and Goodnefs. For
by this Means he has taken essectual Care that noae .
fuould transgrcfs the Laws of Nature with.out Punilliment,
or offer unnecessilry Violenee to the Appetites
of others ;. or if it were needsmissionary to offer
it, yet that it should not be without some Ineonvenience
to him that does. offer it. It is better that
a Creature ihould be able to prov~de for its own
Safety with some Iru:onveniencies, than that it
.fiK>uld be at Liberty to offer needless Violenee to
others, and the Laws belonging to their particular
Nature be broken to no manner of end : For by
that means there would be more Evils in Nature
Chan there are at present, and they would be multiplied
unnecessarily. Hence it appears how worthy
it i& of God to 113vc formed the. Nature of thing. s
m
in such a manner, that from the very Conftitutiori
of them the Intemperate, Injurious, the Thies,
Robber, Adulterer, Proud, Envious, & c. should
have something to dread. If any one a1k why
there are not such Punisliments as might esse&ially
imprint a lively sense upon our Minds, and thereby
totally restrain us from a wrong Choice ? I anf
wer : A greater Evil must not be done on account
of a less i but if the Punisliments and Dread of
of them were inereased to such a Degree as to be
sufficient to prevent all kind of Evil, they themselyes
would be the greatest of all Evils, and the dread
of them would more deeply assea, and be a greater
affiiCtion to the Minds of Men, even of those who
would not do amisS, than the Evils themselv:es are,.
for the Preservation of which these Punislimenm
are proposed by God. It waa theresore fit that
there fhculd be some measure in Puni1liments ;
'Viz. left by being always present to the Mind of
Mortals they 1hould prove a greater Prejudice to
to our Eafe and HappindS, than those very Ev~
which are prohibited under the Penalty of them
would be, were we forced to undergo them.

III. As to the Punisliments which Goci has affixed
by way of Sanshon to positive Laws, we must ·
affirm that they are to be esteemed as Admonitions
and Notices of the Mifchiess consequent upon
evil EleCtions, rather than that God himself will
immediately infliti: them. Natural Conscience is for
the most part sufficiently able to inform us what
is Good and. what Evil: but it was impossible for
Nature to acquaint us with all the Consequenees
which attend our Atl:ions in an Infinite Train and
Continuance of things. Now, left we should be
involved in Evils unawares, and contrmissionary to our·
Expetl:ations, God has informed us by positive
Laws what our Condition must be if we will in-dulge
ourselyes in Evil EleCt:ions. And has-- promulged
them by way of P#nijhmmts denouneed,
3. rather
rather than . by tunple Preditlion, that they II'light
enter more deeply into our Minds, and.oblige us to
take care of oursdyes.

IV. But if there be any thing which. is not reducible
to this head, and seems to prove an immediate
InjliDion by the Deity, ~either is that done
withoul: Reafon. For it is fit that God 1hould re•
move that Bclng out of the World which cannot·
be made confifi:ent with the Good of the Universe:
-and reform that by Chastifement which would otherwise,
through its irregular Motion, prove of ..
fensive to the Author, and all about it. Puniflunents
then are anQexed to Evil EleCtions in order to pre°*
Vmt them, and inflisted to corretl and amend the
Offenders, or to deter others from the like Offences.
If theresore the Appointment and Inflistion of Puniiliments
prevent greater Evils than they are them
selyes ; it follows that God has chosen the better
Part in establishing and exact:ing them.

V. It may be asked, how this can agree w_ith the
Puniiliments of the Wieked, which the Cbrijlian
Religion declares to be Eternal? For in the first
place, 'tis plain that they are not inflisted either to
reform ~e Guilty (for there is no room for Reformation
in Hell) or to deter ochers from the like
Guilt: for ·Sin will be at an End, and the very
possibility of sinning taken away before they Jhall
be institl:ed. They can neither be of use to the Dead
theresore, nor to the Living ; for they are kept fe- I
cret while they might be of any use. Consequently 1
there feetns to be some other end of these Punifh- •
ments, 'IJiz. to make Satisfaction to · the Divine 1
Yengeance for the Injury and Affront offered to his
Majesty.

VI. Secondly, Thefe Eternal Torments appear
to be not very agreeeble to the.Divine CEconomy
in another respect. For it is to be observed that
God has frarried all things ·and dif posed them in
such a manner, that nothing maytepent of its hav-
F f ing
ing. been made by him : for when it is comt; to ~
thal it's Mifery exceeds. i.t's Pleisure, the &ing pe:- .
rishe~ and is withdrawn from both. Not tQ exist
theresore, or not to. perceive any means of R~ef,
is- th~ very worst: Coqditi~n, as was 1hewp before t,
A violent Objetl: not only destroys the ~nfory
but takes away the Senfe itsdf;, the Divine ~
nefs providing that' no Creature 1houlel be worse by
its Existence . than if it had not exifh:d. And as far
as appears, thinking Beings ought tQ bC d~~ wit1'.
.after the fame Manner, 'lJiz. When Pain, Sorrow,
Fear, Anxiety, and the reft of the Pafiions an4
AffeClions . inerease to fo great a Degree that the
Mind receives more Evil than Good from the Senfe
of it's Existence, 'tis reasonable that the Ex~efs Qf
these 1hould extinguish Thought itself,. as the Extess
of bodily Pains destroys the Senfe : Otherwi~
these miserable Beings seem to receiV'e. no Benefit
from God, fmce Providenee has reduced them to ~
State worse than that Non-existm_te in which it found
them. [p.] .Neither does it seem a fuflicient v~
cation of the Divine Goodnefs, to fay, that this befalls
them through their own Fault. for it is hardly
agreeable to Goodnefs to have placed any Being iQ.
that State which was obnoxious to such excefilve
Mifery: For who would choose Existence attended
with .. a danger that fo very much over-ballances.
it ? He is not a wife Man, that apqfcs aU his Estate
to hazard,. nor a good Man that obliges any
one to do it. .

l VIL Thirdly,. Whatever is perpetual must have
· a 111Jlttral and perpetttal ,Cause ; for a perp;:tual Mi-
1 racte is not. to be expetl:ed. ff theresore die Punifu..
nients of the Wieked be eternal, it seems needsmissionary
. for these Punisliments .to arise from the Lilws and
Conftitution of Nature. For it_ is scaree coru;civable
how a State of Violenee 1hould be perpetual. I have
proposed these Objcd:ions at length, left I 1hould
~
t ,Ch • .of.· f. 8. F· S· [p.] Su Matth. 26. 24.•aJMark 1+ 24•
seem to have declined them on accomit of their Dif.,
ficulty~ (86.), . . . . .

VIII. A$ tQ the' first Objeaion, I answer : It ap-.
pears from the: Light of Nature that there 1ha,U. be
flllure P"'llijliments, but not that these 1hall be Eter~
11aJ: we mu{t not theresore. enquire of Natural Rea-:fon
why they are inflisted; for they ~belong .. to
revealed Religion, by which they are denouneed :
that is~ there may be a Reafon for ,them, but such
as n beyond the mere natural Sagacity of Man to
discover .. Now we find many things of this kind
in Nature; it does not theresore follow, because the
GoodndS of God has revealed to us that the Pu-:
ni1liment of the Wieked shall endure for ever, that
he is· also obliged to reveal why and how that com~ .
to pass. For perhaps it may be above the Power'
of our Mind to conceive it in the present stare of ;
Things. . .1


NOTES.

(86.) The chies of those Aathors who seem to op1<>fe the I
ftri8, absolate Eternity of Hell Torments,. are ABp. 'liilotjon; :
'f". B11m1t, ii Statu Mwt. Ch. 10. p. 290, t!/c. 'T. Srwinlm iii:
the .ApJinfliJt to his Book on Hell. The Aathor of the Anno· 1
tations an ~ Ori1J!talis, p. 13• 74, S, <Allikr in his 1.1t1,.,-:. ~
litil Enf•iry, p. IO)o &c. and his E.lf".1 on Rru1a/1tl R1ugia11, 4
p; 142, &c. B..,k, Epifiapi111. and the Fratrts Polo11i. See I
also Fa/,,.icii Dt/1!1111 Argpergamumintonim &c. C. 47. p. 720. and
rwo PiCc:eSin the Phmix, W/Ji.flon's Difio11rfi. Or Whit'e's Reftoration
of-all Things. Printed A. D. 171z, in the Preface tci
which many other Authors both Antieut and modern, are ci,;.
tetho the fame purpol'e. ·
Some of those who have· particulariy infisted· on the De.fence
of it are ABp. D4'Wts, ·J111~in, FitlJ11, Lupton, Llll'r, Har/Jery,
Shtrlocl on PNJ11Jii111e1, Ch •. 2. and on af11t11r1 Stalt, RJ""'"•
Part 1ft. Chap. 7. ·Nichofs Omfmnct with a 'lhlijl, Part 3. p.
309, &c. H"hit!J, • .Apftllilix lo zJ. 'Ih'.!f. Scott's Cbrijlian L~ •.
Vol. S· p. 91. &c. S.W. andDlscourse 22d. p. 435, & zd. '\ ol.
of his Works, Fot Pmitl·. H'itnesses of Chrijhani~;·Part ::
llat" ~ ti;, Enjl1Mt of GoJ, &c. Chap. 1 z. Sec che foll~i11&;
Note and N. go: · ' · ·
Ffz

IX. Secondly, Who will undertake tQ 1hew that.:
the Eternal.Punisliment of the Wieked has no Ten- :
deney ~awards confirming good Men in the Choice· 1
of their Duty ? (8 7:) If God makes use of Meani
for that End, and doth not immediately exert hi9
Omnipotence alone, scaree could any other more
cfseaual Means be round out to make the Blessed
approve themselyes in their Choice conformed to
the Divine Will, and persevere therein, than the
c:ontinual Contemplation of th.ofe miserable Bein~
who have done otherwise. Election is matter Of
Freedom, and not to be excited or prevented by
other means than a Representation of Good or E'Vil
so the Understanding. Smee theresore God has undertaken
to cond11Ct and preserve an almost infinite
multitude of thinking Beings to all Et~ty, thro•
aH the Changes and Soccessions of things, in u
great a deg~ of Happinefs as ~ pofilble, without
Violenee done· to EleCtiOl'ls ; where is the W onder
jf he leave a few to the Mifery which they broughr
upon themselves, thereby to give the reft. a Warn~
ing how mucli they ought to shand ·upon their
guard against the like ? There i9 no net:eftity th~fore
to attribute eternal Punifpergamument to the Divine'
Y1ngea11ce, (nor is there properly any such thing in
God, but it is ascribed to him, as other hpergamuman Paffions
are, in condesccnfion to our Capacity.) For
since these Punillunents may be conceived to promote
the good of the whole, they may arise from·
the.Goodnlfs, and not the Ymge1111&e of the Deity. x.

NOTES.
(87.} See ABp. Dll'Wts'• Senn. S· p. 73• &,, or Note Sz.
Or it may be for th'e pcrpet11al Benefit and Improyement of
{ome other Systems; fee the latter end of Note 81. Or per·
haps lot a Randing Mon11meilt and Warning to the Hcathen
World during their State of Probation, which for ought we
know, may be· extended ~yond this Life, as well as that of
Christiat11 themselyes,
See Scott'• Chrijlia• Lift, Bw. zd Vot. p. SP·
Somethiag of this kind, I hpergamumbly apprehCDd, 1n11ft be con·
teived as the Reafon for Hell-Torments, in order to make
them consistent with pcrsea Goodneii [ f•] how long foever
this may be neceil'missionary to continue, or whatever we suppoGs
site Nature of these Torments to be ; of which below.
[ f·l s,, Note 13

X. As to the second ObjeB:ion, The Matter is
yet in debate whether it were better to be miserable
than not to be at all, and there are Argµments on
both Sides. ( 8 8.) 'Tis manisest that, what the Objettio11
mentions, 'Viz. those Evils which over-baJ.Jante
the Desue and Happinefs of Life put an End
to Life itself, .and that such Obje¢l:s as are hurtsul
to the Senfe, at length destroy it. The fame seems
to hold good in chinkin2 Substanees, 'Viz. those
things which asseCl: the Mind to a higher Degree
than it is able to bear, may ill like manner put an
end to it. For they may be supposed either to drive
us .to MadnefS, or iO far to ditOrder the thinking
Faculty, as to· make us think of nothing at all.
Who can tell whether the Punisliment of the Wickrd
may not lead them into a kind of Phrenfy and
Madne& ? Thus· they may indeed be very miser.able,
and become a fad Spettacte to others-; they
may be 'sensible of their Mifcry a.lfo, and strive against
it with all their P.ower ~ but while they do
not observe or believe that it is founded in perverse
Eleilion, they may hug themselyes in the Cause
die E.ff'Ccts whereof they abhor ; being still wife in
their own Opinion, and as it were pleasing them.
selyes in their Mifcry.


NOTES.
(38.) A moll elaborate Dilputation on thia Subjell may be
fcen in Bp. Barbrw's Remains, p. +70, &t. But our Author.
in the Jaft Subsea. of his Book, par. 5, &t. very reasonably
grants, 'I/Jat N.,,-1xijlmt1 !Jttot1111 prtftra/J/1 11 Exijlt11tt w/Jt,,.
"',,. 1# s .. •f MiftrJ '""''' that_ of H"11.i11tji, atu/ Evil kU11U1
1'l'-'i111111t ;,, tht who/I ; and theresore if he takes thi1
Q!!eftion in the fame Senfe, he had no great oc:cafion to start it.
Nay the Q.ueftion will be about an absolute lmpo.lft/Jility, if any
Mifery which over·ballances the Happinefs of Life do i/fo
fNh put an End to Life, aa· our Author maintains in thil very
faragrapJi: Co~J which Notion fee .Note 37.
. ¥fJ


Thus the more they labour under it, the more
they embrace the Cause of it, and thereby become
their own hindrance from ever getting fre.e ; and
will not suffer themselyes to be any thing but what
they'1U'e. This we f.ee done daily by mad and fran.
tic ·Pedbns, ·and reek.On it a part ¢ their-U nhappiness.
The Divine Goodnefs theresore is not to
be charged with Crudty for letting them continue
in that Existence, though it be very miserable, when
they themsdyes will not have it· removed : or for
not altering their Condition, which they utterly refuse
to have altered. 'Tis better for them indeed
not to be, than to be : but only in the Opinion
ef wife· Men, ta .which they do not alsent. For they
indulge themselyes in their obstinate Elealon, and
chough every way surrounded and opprested with
Woes, yet will·· they not alter wh21: they have once
embraced. We have frequent·examples in this Life
resembling this kind of Obftinacy.

XI. W ~ fee perverse People vt>luntarily undergf:!
ing Pains, AffiiCtions, Torments, and even Death
itsdf, rather than repent of their Resolution and
change what they have once determined in their
Mind. Nor is it uncommon for some to indulge
end in a manner pleasa themselyes in their vecy
Miseries. Thus the sorrowsul love all such things
as aggravate and soment their Grief : and in like
manner the Envious, the Angry, the Ambitious,
the Defpairing : not that they are insensible of
U neasinefs under these Paffions, or do not believe
themselyes to be miserable ; · but becaute they had
' rather· have that Mifery fo long as they enjoy their
Choice, than want it and them too ; or at least
they can perstft in it, because they do not observe
that this Mifery arises from thence .. When th¢reo.
fore the Wieked obstinately oppose themselyes to
God, and refuse to make their EleCtions conformable
to ·his Will, they take delight perhaps ii:t that
very Opposition: to hate Gad, to disobey his Commands,
and strive against him with fl}l their Pow~,
is pleasmg to them ; and though they fee themselves
overwhelmed with innpergamumerable Evils, yet they had
rather. endure them all than repent. As Men that
. are .desperately in Love, ambitious, envious, choose
co
to bear Torments, loss of Estate; and haz:a.rd of
Life, rather than lay aside these foolith and ·be- ·
witehing Afsections. We may eastly conceive then
how the Wieked in Hell may be in very great
Mifery upon the inerease of their Obftinacy and
Folly, and yet unwilling to be freed from them.
All fee and exclaim aga.inst the Folly., Mifery, and
Madnefs of those Men who spend their Elate in
Vice, impair their Health, and bring on an untimely
Death ; and for no other end but because
they will 4o fo : yet they perfill: in this, and their
Obftinacy inereases with their Evils. Thefe arc
some Prel1'des of the Mifery of the Damned, and
:&om hence we may understand that these Perfons
are extremely miserable, and yet will not be fet at
Liberty (89.)


NOTES.

(89.) From hence likewise we may undertland what a nat11-
ral, absolute, and indi_f~nfible Necessity there is for watching
over all our H11/Ji11, Affe!lio11s, Appetites, &c. for curbing our
Pashom, and correaing our Defire9 by Rl•fan ; for taking a
lirill and constant care that these ·be neither vieleot, inegular,
nor fixed on improper Objeas in this Life, if we hope to avoid
Mifery in the Life to come. For if these accompaziy us into
the other World, (and if we confider what Scott and Rymer
:have faiel upon the S11bjetl, it will appear infinitely probahle
that they do) the fame or greater Unhappiness must: unavoidably
attend them there. If we ihall have any Memory in the
other World of what pafi'ed i_n this (which we must Jiave1 Up.
order to give us either a good or evil Co11fti111u, and to make
111 capable either of Reward or Punisliment in that rd'pell)
how probable is it that we illall then also feel the force·of all
tliofe H11/Jiu. and .dffaci111i111u which in this Life were fo strong
as to raise Pafiions, Affi:Clions, & c. in us, an.d make us constantly.
proceed upon them for {elf-evident Principles, and par·
sue them for ultimate EUI of Aaion l "'And this being fo, of
• what unspeakable consequenee are the Aaions of Men, that
"thus draw after them a Chain of Joys or Woes, as long as
· ".' Eternity l. And how caresul ought we to be to what course
.,, of Life we determine our(elyes, considering that our Ettn111I
" Fa,te depends upon what we are now doing, that every· moral
~-· Aaio._ we perfcii:m is a Step to H111'11111 or H1ll-rw11rJ1, that
••in every bad Choice we make, we are planting our 'Iuphet,
"or our PtW11rliji, aad chat in the Conf~uence of our present
-- F f 4 Atiioas

It may be objetl:ed, that these miserable Beings
may r.eceive (ome kind of Pleasure from their Ele&
lion.s. But we place Felicity not barely in the AD
of cboosing, bQt much more in the Enjoyment of the
Objects chosen. The more obstinately theresore
any one chooses absurd aod impossible things, the
more miserable will he be. when frustrated of his
Choice ; and we ~y imagine the d~mned to ho
always frustrated : nevertheless, after fo much Warning
and Experience, they do not intend to alter
their Elections, but still perstft in them, oppressed
with the Senfe and Weight of their, Mifery, and
plunged in deep despair. For it is possible that
they may be regardless or ignorant that there is no
other Way for them to be freed from these MiJ:.
cries, but by altering their Elettions, and not know
how to do tlµs, fo as to persist in them for ever 9
and become more desperate by Difappointments,'
and to au~ent and multiply thei~ Mifecy by ~ew
Attempts, which p~ove no l~fs unhappy. The PQw ...
~ of willipg the State ~hey a,fe in is not theresore
of any Service to them towards the Attainment of
Happinefs, but reoders them capable of Eternal
Mifery. ·For such EleCl:ions may' have the fame Relation
to this kind of Mifery, as _the ~atu.ral Appetites.
have to fain.

XII. Now it_ is fussi~iently c;o~funant to the_D~vine
Goodneflil to. permi~ or inBiCl: this kind of
1 J>unHhmeot, nor would it be less subservient to the
Ends for which Punisliments are wont to Qe .imposed~
'lJiz. th!lt by a previous Appreh_enfron of"thc;:m.
we may__ learn to be wife, and others be deterl'ed
from o~diog by our Example. For who does not
dread Fury and Madnefs as the most mirerable
state of Mind ? Who does not condemn thct Folly
and Madnefs of Men in Love, of envious and ambitious
Perfons ? Especially when he beholds them
labouring thereby under innpergamumerable Evils, from
which they will not be delivered ?

NOTE~.
~· Allio~l we shall ""' O.f rtjoi(t to eternal Ages ? Stott~ zd
"Vol. p. z6. See also +th Vol. Chap. 6. p. 992, &t. Fol.
'' Edir. or Hutch1/on on the Condua of the Paffions and Af"
fetlions, s. 4, an~ 6. or ~~te 81, 87, ~· and par. 1-h ot
''. P,.ia Se.¢tio.~. ·

XIII. Bui allowipg that Existence is worse than
Non-existence to the Damned, let theip imagine
their Mifery to, be greater than it really is. Let
it be a part of their Mifery, to· be conscious that
they were the only Cause of all their Grief: yet
since that could not be prevented without gt"C?tter
detriment to the whole, there is no room for objetl:ing
against Providenee which always does the heft.
If God had made nothing at all, and been contented
to have remained alone, there would have been
nothing that could fin, that could choose amiss,
that could be. miserable. But since it is impossible
that there should be more Gods, the Deity made
Creature$ such. as the · N a~re of a Created Bei~g
allowed. Now it was expectient, for the Good of
the whole, that· some of them should have a Power
of bringing Mifery upon themselyes by Evil Elections.
Nor can any thing be charged upon the
Goodnefs of God in this, unless that he created
Men, and not Gods equal to himself; and that he
preserred $e Salvation of the Generality to that of
some Particulars. He chose theresore that some
fuould regret their h:aving been made by God, 'Viz.,
through the abuse of their Free-Will, rather than
that none'Ihould ~happy by ufmg lt aright.

•XIV. As to the third Objettion, I believe it to
be a great Truth that the Mifery of the Wieked
arises from the very Conftitution of the Sinner and
that the Laws of Nature hold in evil Elections.
We fee that our Bodies may be maimed for ever,
and our Limbs difiocated and distorted to such a
degree as to bxomc totally incapable of those Funcpons
for which Nature defigped them. Why j)iould
we
we not haYc the fame Opini<Xi of the Mind, "'Uiz.
l'hat by deprayed FJections, Patrions, and Afsections,
it may be fo far diverted from the right way
of thinking, as to becOme equally disabled and unfit
for ~nihg ·its ACCions according to·the Dictates
of Right Reafon, as a lune Man is for a.
Race? We may fee every Day that right Notions
of things are capable of being perverted t>y a _perverse
Habit of thinking; and it is evident fioi.n
Experience that we mistake and are ignorant of
usesul things. We are wont to ·labour under Prejudices,
&Pd be averse to ~ber Counfels ; in fuotts
we are willing to endure ·any thing rather than alter
our Choice. It is a common thing for us to
-please ourselyes in Dangers, in the Ruin of our
·.Fortunes, in the Lofs of Eafe, and Life itself; and
our Volition, pervtrfe as it is, fornetimes appears
more desitable than Friends, Kingdoms, Pleahires.
er even Life. If ~erefore God does not interpose
his Omnipotence, the fame Errors, the fame Ignorance,
the fame Habit of a perverted Mind and
obstinate Propensity to Evil, which here draw· us.
aside from the right Path, may continue with us
iOr ever : nor will the Soul that is immersed in this
kind of Evil be capable of cuting"itself: For one
that is infeCted with 1:hefe Maladies is a5 unfit to
help himself, as one that has cllt off his Hands and
·Feet is· unable to rwt or feed himself. (go.)

NOT·ES.
(90.) This is the true Meaning of that M•Niki Ptt~.ii wlaich
. is said to remain and fet us at Enmity with God, and under a
natural Incapacity of Happiners, and.which according to some
makes it impoflitile for future Panisliments to have any other
Period• than the total Extinaion or Annilallatioa of the Subjeas
of them ; and what Ground there can be co hope for chat
may be fecn from the Authors referred to in Npie· 86.
Our Author, in the following Paral!.9ph, explains how this
Ma<Ja may be conceived to render GOd and good "Men oor
Amon~ and it inafy·co· apprehend how utterly iaeapahle-ot'
Happiaefi · &lw Man md ~ w.bofc wkole Soal it laCat ·'IDOthet

XV. Se.costdly, A Perfon of· rhis Difposttion· of '
Mind hates God, for he fees that he has chosen . wch things, in the Enjoyment whereof he places .
his Deligltt, as cannot be confill:eht ·with the Divine
Will. He theresore looks upon God· as his EnCIDf,
and consequently avoids au Commerce with.
him, and. endeayours to abU:ond from him, but
never thinks of changing his own Will : For thro'
Error and Ignorance he knows not how to take
delight ·in any thing elfe. Theresore· he applies "'11
his Endeayours to the Attainment of such things as
annot really ·be attained, and striveS" for ever in
vain with a more powersul Being, i. e. GOd;
nor ceases from struggling, though full of Mifery
and DefPair. For though he feels himselstorment~
with a most exquisite Pain, yet he dreads a greliter
m>m the change of his Resolution : · he fees Mifery
invacting him on each Hand, and is forced either
to oppose me Deity without any prospect: of Success,
.or to give over the Contefl:, and lay aside all
Hopes of ;enjoying the Object: of his Choice : He
em-

NOT ES.

ther way; whose every Motion, Thought, and _Jnclin_~tiop 0
wliofe Dcfigu~ Defirts and Hopes, ate all fixed and riveted
to those Objcas which can never satisfy them, which are either
quite different from, or contrmissionary to the very Nature and
Idea of true rational Happinefs. A view of the Consequenees
attending each inveterate evil Habit, each ungovernable Paffioa,
or Affiction misapplyed, will thew the abfu.rclity of supp
«?fiag any Perfon in foch a Cafe to be happy even in Heaven
itself •. Bat tl1is important Doarine of the fi>rce- of Ha!Jits~
~c. in this World, as well as the Contii,uance of them in the
next, •.has been fo well stated and inforced by the Authon rei:
rred to above, that an attempt to give any further Jllustration
of it seem1 impraaic:able. I shall theresore difmiss it with a
Paiilge from the Ca-.fts of. tht Dtell} ef Chri/lilln PitsJ, Ch. 1.
" T.bOfe immaterial Felicities we expefl, cfo naturally suggest
•'to us the necollity of preparing our Appetites, and hungers
" for them, without which Heaven can be no Heaven to as :
•• For. since the Pleafare of any thing mu Its from the Agreet•
ment between it and the Defi~, what Satisfaaion c:an Spiri~
IM4I Enj01meats give unto a CmraJ Milli f Alass, what De.
Ji gilt
• Stt tht Spetlator, N. 90.

embraces the former, as the less Evil of the two,
an~ yet a greater can scaree be devised. The perverse
.Fool may be pleased with the very Contdt,
though it proves to no manner of purpose. In the
ioterim God leaves such a one to himself, who by
pursuing absurd and impossible things will bec;omo
troublesome to himself and others, affiluiting fomc,
and being :attaeked by others like himself. We fee
in this Wodd how much bad Men delight in heaping
Mifeiies on other!!, and who are theresore bad
Men because they take delight in Mifchies. The
-Seryant of an absurd Mafter js unhappy, and fo is
he who Jives ~ear a malevolent and morose Neigh ..
hour. Suppose then the Wieked who are banished
from God, and odious to all good Men, afi'ociating
together, and it is easy to conceive what kind of
Society that of Reprobates and Devils must be ; how
grievous and offensive· to each other. We may ob.
serve how very pernicious a wieked Governor is in
his Provinee, hOw miserable they that are subjeet
to such : how much more wretehed must the state
of the Wieked be, who are subjeaed to, and join-
. eel

NOTES.

•• light would it be to the Swine to be wrapt in fine Linen
•• and laid in Odours 1 His Senfes are not 21'&tiied by any
" such Delicacies ; nor would he f'ceJ anr thing besides the
" Torment of being with-held from the Mire. And as little
" Complacency would a brutish Soul find in those purer and
" resined Pleasures, which can only upbraid, not fatiafy him.
" So that could we, by an impossible Supposition, faney such
" a one aH'pergamumod to those Fruitions, his Pleasure sure would
" be as little as his preparation for it was. Those. Eyes whicla
" have continually beheld Ya•it,,, would be dazled, not de..
lighted with the /Jeat!fic Yiffe11; neither could that Tongue
"which has.accustomed it(eJ( only to 041b1 and B/llflht•11,
•· find Harmony or MuJic in Halltlr4ab1. It is the peculiar
.. Privilege of the prt i11 Hearl, that they ihall fee Gcid ; and
•' if any others could fo invade this their Inclosure, aa to take
'' Heaven by Violenee, it surely would be a very Joyless Pof''
session to these Men, and only place them in a Condition to
"which they have the greatest Aversion and Antipathy. So
'' that l'.solin~fs here is not only nece&ry co the aequiring.
~· b"t the EnjoyJDent QfBliss h~easter.
cd with ' hone but mad, malicious, envious ·and
froward Beings ? - -

XVI. It is to be believed that1God has provided
a place that is suitable and proper for them, ~d to
which they are as much confined by the Laws of
their Nature, as Fishes to the Sea, or terrestrial
Animals to the Earth. What fort of a Place that
is we know not, but it is reasonable to believe that
there is such an one. Men in this Life choose for
themselyes Habitations and Companions according
ro their own Genius, Temper, and Difposition of
Mind : and Likenefs begets J:;.ove : and who can
doubt but the fame thing may attend the bad and
good after Death ? The Good resort theresore to
the Society of God, Angels, and Spirits of Good Men~
But the Wieked choose those Ghosts which were
Partakers in their Iniquity, and Dt'Dils for their
Companions : And this may p0fsibly be brought
about by natural Instintl:, and mere hpergamuman Difposition.
Nor is God wanting in Goodnefs if he
suffers them to live in their own way, and enjoy
the Life themselyes have chosen. For this could
not be prevented without · doing Violenee to the
Laws of Nature. And these Punisliments which
the Wieked voluntarily bring upon themselyes,
tend to the Benefit of the Universal System of Rational
Beings. .

XVII. So much for Moral Evils, Laws, Rewards
and Punijh'ments. In which some things may
appear too subtle for common Apprehension ; but
we ought to remember that the Difpute is coneerning
one of the nicest things in Nature, tviz. the
9Perations of our own Mind : and whatever is
said in order to explain these, must nece1farily be
subtle. On this Account the Art of Logi' is calied
subtle, . because it has these for its Objetl:, and any
thing that is more subtle than ordinmissionary is reckoned
L<>gical. He that does not like any thing that is
subtle theresore ought not to dispute about what
relates
relates to our own Minds. Mwal E'lJil is ~ it
were the 'Distemper of our Minds arifmg from ~
irregular Motion of the cogitative Faculties: now,
as 'tis difficult to discover the Causes of thase Distempers
which insect the Body, fo it is much more
difficwt to find out the Causes and the Motions of
those Maladies which affliet the Mind. For it is
neceismissionary that we pcrfeCl:ly underfuuld our own
Minds, the Notions, Operations, and Means whereby
the Will is moved, and the U n~erstanding operates,
before we can hope to make a full Difcovery
of Lliefe Paffions of the Mind, and the Cauies of
them. And 'tis evident to any one how difficult
that is : what nice Abftra.Ctions, and long Dedutl:i ..
on of Consequenees it must require. 'Tis no won ..
der then if the lnvestigation of the Causes, and Origin
of the Evil ef the Mind require some things which
are too subtle for all to comprehend.

SECT. III.

Coneerning the ffl_ue.ftion, Why b-ad Mm art'
· happy, 111Jd good Men miserab/e.

I.THIS ~eftion seems to have some relation
to the former. For if Punisliment, that js~
Natural Evils, be in.flitted in Proportion to the desert
~f Evil Elections., whence come ~ things
to eVil Men, and Evil to the Good? 'Tis not fo
·difficult to answer this ~eftion upon the Supposition
-of a future State, as to make it ~ecefl"missionary for'.
us to infill: much upon it. And it m uft be confefl"ed~
that it has been treated of in a very proper Manner
by several Writers : (9 1.) fo that there's scaree

NOTES.
any
(91.) Vi~. Shtrh(i on "Judgmtnt. CJi.1. ~ 3. p. 76. ~c.' 1ft"
. Edic.-onPnwidnu .Ch.7. p . .zsB~ .zd.Eclit. ~. p. 817.·
· Cocl.611,.,,.

any Room for Scruple. NevertheldS a ftw thinsa.
Qi~ be touched upon, and very briefly, that we
may not repeat what has been said already •
. II. In the first place then the matter of FaCl: is very
osten doubtsul, notwithstanding. the Complaints
which many Pcrfons make to the contrmissionary. We
fee indeed good Men fTcquently miscr.able, but it
is a ~ery whether their Goodn.cfs may not be ow,..
ing to their Mifery, and they would. have proved
wi~ked if they had. been tempted by Profperity ? It
is not the Good then that are affiiacd, but the Miferable
that are rectilimed. On ·the 'other hand, we
behold happy, rich, and powersul Men that are wick~
ed ; but their WiekednefS may be attributed to
their Prasperity,· and they would perhaps be very
good if the Incitements to Evil were removed.
'Tis not the Wieked theresore that are happy; but
the happy that are corrupted with :Profperity, and
theres<>re fall into Wiekednefs. .

III. Secondly, We are blinded with . Prejudice,
and thereby, rendered very partial Judges of the
GoOOnefs . or Badnefs of other Men. He that is
our Acquaintance and befriends us is a good .J.v.{an~.
he that .fayours our Enemies ·is a. very bad one •.
Thus Stipio is celehrated by the Roman Hiftorians, ,
and if any hard or unprof~us. Accident .befal'
him, t!iey. begin to a1k whether there be any Gcxh ? '
Whether Divine Providenee takes care of hpergamum.an
Affairs ? But Hanni/Jal is condemn'd, his Victories
are :charged as Crimes on Providenee, and they .repine
at his having been fo long successful. Whereas
'tis really dubious whether of the two was the.
worfa:

NOTES.

Corl""'"• Efi"a.y S· P"'P· 7, 8. p.117, &c. Wollqfto11, p. 71, and
110, &c. Crllll1tl on Eccl. 9. z. St11eca, Ep. z.a,. Fijjes's Sermons,
Fol.14 and 19. Scott, z vol. Ch.+ § 3. p.331, &,. 8'Vo.
and Difco11rfe 16. p. 3 20, ~t. zd 'fol. Fol. Stillingf/ett, Orig;,,,,
811ttw, &.~. Cb.3. S z1. p.326, &c. Pol. GrH11,"Co/1111/ogiaS,11-
m1, R.3. Ch. a. S S7• S~· B11t. with the. gr,a~ Acc:ura.c:y_ b.f
M~. !~t~, Discours6, Vol. 1. 4111. -

worse M'an; both certainly were 'Very bad: For
their Aim was to put the World into Confusion, tO
fi\bdue N: ations by force of Arms, the one intend;.
ing to make Carthage, the other Romt1 the Head or the World, by Slaughter, Rapine, War, and
lnjustice. Now the Man that studies to oppress
the whole World in Servitude, and bring it under
the Power of that Nation to which he belongs,
this Man is truly wieked and unworthy of Succm,
however 'he may veil his Ambition, Pride, and
Fury in some particular Instanees, under the specious
pretence of Clemency and Love of his Country.

IV. Thirdly, as we are partial Judges of the
Def eris of other Men,· fo are we no less unquali·.
6ed to pronounce on their Felicity. For we are ta·
ken with the pomp, and noise, and glittering outstde
of things, and consequently judge the Rich,
the Potent, the Noble, and the Learned, to be:
happy;· but the Poor, Ignoble and Unlettered, mi•
ferable. And yet herein we are very frequently
mistaken, fmce neither of them are what they aP"
pear to be. For life is osten attended with· more
Happinefs among Cottages, Hufbandiy, and Tradet
nay in the midst of Bodily Pains and Diseases i
than among Scepters, Diadems, high Pedigrees,
and supersluous Heaps of Books; fmce, as we have
shewn before, and . Experience r.eftifies, HappinefS
lies chiesly, if not solely, in Eleenon. .

V. Fourthly, It is to be observed, that the
greatest Part of the Happinefii of this Life confdh
in Hope, and that the Frultion of the desired Object
is not answerable to the Hope pre-conceived,
which must be esteemed an Indication that complete
Happinefs is reserved by Nature for another Life;
the more then we aspire after, and adhere to the
present Objed:s, the less Care we shall take of those
things which tend to our future Happinefs. · It wu
theresore wifely provided by God, that the Good
.should not be corrupted with too plentiful an En·
3 joyment
joyment of the things of this World, but that the
Bad 1hould have them in abundanee: For by this
means all may understand that their time ought
not to be spent in these things, but that the Space
of this fho~ Life should be employed in looking
after other Matters, i.e. such as regard Eternity.
To· conclude, we must affirm that nothing happe:
ns to good Men which may not prove a Means
of greater Good; nor to the Bad, which may not
be for their Punisliment or Reformation.

VI. And I hope it appears from what has been
said, that the Objettions of the Manicbeans and ·
Paulicians are not fo formidable as they have seem'd ·
to some ; and that hpergamuman Reafon is not fo blind
but that it can solve these DifficuJties from the
Principles laid down, and such Suppafitions as are
generally admitted ; and. though not absolutely cer-
. tain, yet probable however, and such as we use to
aequiesce in, in the Solution of other Phenomena.
But I offer all these things to the Censure of the
Learned : I submit them entirety to the Judgment
of the Catholic Chureh, especially to the Governours
of those Parts of it which constitute the Churehe$
of England and Ireland. If there be any thing.
herein which seems not persealy ~ble to
their Faith, as I hope there is not, _and would
not have it, ~ desire that may looked upan as ab-.
solutely unsaid and retra&d.

F I N I S.~


Divine Prede}Jination and Fore-~ledge
c,on.ftj/ent with the Freedom of Man"s Will

A
SERMON
PR-EA~HED AT
CHRIST-CHURCH, DUBLIN,
May 15, 1709.
By his GRACE
WILLIAM Lord Archbishop of Du/J/in.
THE· SEVENTH EDITION

Divine PredeA:ination arid Fore-knowledge
consist:ent with the Freedom of Man's Will.

R 0 MAN S VIII. ~9, 30.

For 'UJ~om 1'e die! f orelt1iO'W, be a/fa ditl predefli~att to ~e ton•
form'J to tl?e Image of bis Son, that he might /Je the Firft ..
Born among ""'11J Brethren. MDr1riuer, 'UJhom he did pre.
'tlejlinate, them he a/fa tailed. ; and whom k ta/led, them
he a/fa justified ; and whom be jteflisled, them be also glorified.
- ·
SI. IN these Words the Apostle lays down the fevetal
. Steps b}" which God proCeeds in. the saving of his
Eeet. 1jl, He kno~ and confiders those, whom he designs
for Salvation •.. 2Jbr,. H~ d~s and predestinates them
to be like his Son Jefus Chrift, in Holiness here, and Gloq
~er, that he might be the Firft-bom among many
Brethren. 3dly, He calls them to the Means of Salvation.
41hly, He justifies : And lastly, He glorifies them. This
is the Chain and Series of God's dealing with his beloved ;
in which he is represented to us .as first designing, and then
executing his gracious Purposes towards them. ·

I am very sensible, that great Contesttions and Divisions
have happeacd in the Chureh of God about Predejlination and
Repro/Jation, about Ele&lion and the Decrees of God ; that
learned Men have engaged with the greatest Zeal and
Fiereenefs 1n this Controyersy, and the Difputes have .proved
fo intricate, that the most diligent Reader will perhaps,
after all his labour in perufmg them, be but little satisfied,
and less edified by the. greatest part of all that has been
written upon this Subjecl:. And hence it is that confide;ring
Men of an Parties seem at last, as it were by consent, to
have laid it aside ; and seldom any now venture to bring it
into the Pulpit, except some very young or imprudent ·
Preachers.

Not but that the Doctrine laid down in my Text, is un ..
~oubtedly auc and useiUl, if we could but light on the
true
true and usesul way of treating it ; for fo our Chureh Jias.
told us in her seventeenth Article, where she informs us.
That as the godly Confideration of Predejlination is full of
fweel; p1eafa~t, (l_nt/ unfpepkable Comfort to godly Perfans, fo
for curious and earnal Perfans, laeking the Spirit of Cbrij1.,
to have continually /Jefore· their Eyes the Sentence of God's
Predejlination, ·is a mojl dangerous Down/al, whereby th~
Devil tloth thrujl them either into Dejpt1'ation,. 111' int•
Wretebednefs of mojl unclean living.

The Cafe theresure being thus, I 11iall endeayour to lay
before you that which I take to be tjle edifying part of the
Dofuine of Predejlination; and in such a i:nanner (I hope}
as to avoid every thing that may give occas10n to ignorant
or cor:rupt Men to m~kt ~n ilJ. use of it.

§·. II. In order to this, I shall .
FirjJ, Confider the Representation that the Text gives
l>f God,. as contriving our Salvation ; and Ihall endeayour
to explain h.ow these Terms of Fore-knowing and Preaeftinating
~re to -be ~nderstood when attributed to God.
Secondly, Why the holy Scriptures represent God to Us·
after this manner. ·
'I birdly~ What use we are to make of this Dofulne of
God's. fore-feeing,. freely eletling, and predejlinatmg Men t<>
Salvation.

As to. the first of these, JOU may observe that in thtRepresentation
h~ given of God's. dealing with Men,,
there are five ACl:.s- ateribed to him,. Fore-knowing, PreJejlinating,
Calling, Juftifjing, and Glorifjing. And about
each of these great Difputes have arisen among Divines, and
Parties ·and Sects have been fanned on the different Opinions
. coneerning them. However., as to the three lift,
Protejlants seem now pretty well agreed ; but as tO< the two
first, the Differenee is fo, great, that -on account thereof,.
there yet remain formed and separate Panics,. that mutually
refuse to communieate with one another : though I believe,
if the Differenees between them were duly examined and
stated, they would not appear to be fo great as they seem ti:> be
at first view ; nor consequently would there ap~ any
just reason for t\lose Animofitics,. that yet remain· between
the contending ~~!~s-~ - · ·

§:IIL
§ lII. In order to make this evident, we may .con{iqer. ·
( 1.) That it is in essect agreed <;>n all hands, that the
Nature of God, as it is in itself, is incomprehensible by
hpergamuman Understanding: and not only his Nature, but likewise
his Powers and Faculties, and the Ways and Methods
in which he exereises them, are fo far beyond our reach,
that we are utterly incapable of framing ~ and adequat<:
Notions of them. Thus the Scriptures frequently teach us,
particulariy St. Paul in his Epictle to the Romans, Ch. 11.
v. 33. 0 the depth of the Riches /Joth ~f the Wifdom and
/(Jlowledge of God! How 1111seareha/Jle are his Judgments, and
bis Wg,ys pajJfinding out. Ver. 34. For who bath known tb1
Mind of the Lord or who hath Ileen his Counfellor.

· §IV. (2.) We ought to remember, that the Descriptions
which we frame· to Ourselyes of God, or of the divine At·
tributes, are not taken from any direct or immediate Perceptions
that we have of him or them ; but from some Observations
we have made of his Works, and from the Confideration
of those Qualifications, that we conceive would
enable us to perform the like. Thus observing great Order,
Conveniency, and Harmony in all the several .Parts of the
World, and perceiving that every thing is adapted and
tends to the Preservation and advantage of the whole : we are
apt to confider that we could not contrive and settle things
in JO excelient and proper a manner without great Wifdom ;
and thence conclude that God who has thus coneerted and
settled Matters must have Wif dom : And having then ascribed
to him Wifdom, because we fee the esse& and ref
ult of it in his Works, we proceed and conclude that he
has likewise Fore.sight and U nderstanding, because we; c~not
conceive Wifdom without these, and because if we
. were to do what we fee he has done, we coul4 not expeCl:
to perform it without the Exercife of these FacUlties. .
And it doth truly follow from hence, that God must either
have these, or other Faculties and Powers equivalent
to them and adequate to· these mighty Efsects which proceed
from them. And because we do not know what his
Faculties are in thernfulv~, we give them the N amc:S Of
tho1e Powers, that we find would .be needsmissionary to iis in or-
G g + der
der to produce such EfFetts, and call th.em Wifdom, Uf'io'i
derstanding, and Fore-knowledge : but at the fame time
we cannot but be sensible that they are of a nature altogether
different from ours, and that we have no direB: and
pr~ Notion or Conception of them. Only we are furc
that they have Effefu like unto those that do proceed from
Wifdom, Understanding, and Fore-knowledge in us: And
when our Works fail to .resemble them in any particular,
as to PerfcC\:ion, it is by reason of some want or desect in
thcfe Q._ualifications.
Thus our Reafon teaches us to ascribe these Attributes
to God, by way of resemblance and analogy to such ~alities
or Powers as we find most valuable and persea in
ourselyes.

§ V. (3.) If we look into the holy Scripthres, and confider
the Representations given us there of God or his At ...
tributes; we 1hall find diem generally of the fame nature,
and plainly borrowed from some resemblance to things with
• which we are acquainted by our Senfes. Thus when the
holy Scriptures speak of God, they. ascribe Hands, and
Eyes, and Feet to him : Not that it is designed we .fltould
believe that he has any of these Members according to the
literal Signisication : but the meaning is; that he has a
Power to execute all those ;Aas, to the essecting of which
these Parts in us are instrpergamumental : That is, he can converse
with Men as well as if he had a Tongue and Mouth 9
he can diseern all that we do or fay as pemaly as if he
had Eyes md Ears ; he can reach us as well as if he had
Hands and Feet; he has as trUe and substantial a "Being
as if he had a Body ; and he is as truly present every
where as if that Body were infinitely extended. And in
tnith, if all these things which are thus ascribed to him,
did really and literally belong to him, he could not do
what he does near fo esse&lally as we conceive and are sure
he doth them by the Faculties and Properties which he
really possefi'es, though what they are in themselyes be urtknown
to us.

After the fame manner, and for the fame reason, we
find him represented as affcaed with such Pafi°lons as 1'c
· - perceive
perteive to be in ourselyes, 'Viz. as angry and pleasect as
loving and hating, as repenting and changing his Resolutions,
as full of Mercy and proyoked to Revenge. And
yet on Rcfieenon we cannot think that any of these Paffions
can literally assefl the Divine Nature. But the meaning
censdfedly is, that he will as certainly punilh :the Wieked
as if he were insiamed with the Paffion of .A:ngcr against
them: That he will as infallibly reward the GOod as we:
will those for whom we have a particular and assectionate
Love : that when Men turn from their Wiekednefs, and
do what is agreeable to the Divine Command, he will as
surely change his Difpensations towards them, as if he
really repented and had changed his Mind.
And as the Nature and Paffions of Men are thus by a·
nalogy and comparison ascribed to God, because these
would in us be the Principles of fileh outward Amons, as
we fee he has ,performed, if we were the Authors of them :
fo in the fame manner' and by the fame condesccnfion to
the weakness ef our Capacities, we find the Powers and
Operations 'Of our Mind ascribed unto him.
As for example, it is the part of a wife Man to confider
beforehand what is proper for him to do, to preseribc
Means and Methods to obtain his Ends, to lay down fomc
Scheme or Plan of his W 01·k before he begins, and to keep
resolutely to it in the Execution ; for if he should be con- ·
ccived to deviate in any thing from his first purpose, it
would argue some impersection in laying the Design, or
want of Pc.Jwer to execute it. And theresore it is after this
manner die Scripture refreseats God, as purposing and
contriving beforehand al his Works ; and for this reason
.Wisilom and Understanding, and Counfd and Fore-knowledge
arc ascribed t'C> him ; because both Reafon and Scripture
assure us that we ought to conceive of God as having
all the Persection that we perceive to be in these Attributes,
and that he has all the Advantages that these Powers or
Faculties could give him.

The Advantages that Understanding and Knowledge
give a Man in the use of them, are to enable him to order
his M--·a tt-er. s .w --i-th. con. ve-· n-i-ency to. h·--i·m fclf, and consistenciny
in his Works, fo that they may not hinder or cmba.naf9
one another : And inafinuch as all the Works of God are
fo ordered that they have the greatest Congruity in themsdyes,
and are most dceliently adapted to their several Ufes
and Ends, we are sure there is a Power in God who
orders them, equivalent to Knowledge and U nderstanding ;
and because we know not what it is in itself, we ·give it
these Names. ·

§VI. Laflly, The use of Fore-knowledge with us is to
prevent any Surprize when Events happen,. and that we
.may not be at a loss what to do by things coming upon us
unawares. Now inafinuch as we are certain that nothing
can surprize God, and that he can never be at a loss what
to do in any Event, theresore w.e conclude that God has a
Faculty to which our Fore-knowledge bears some analogy,
and theresore we call it by that Name.
But .it dQeS, not follow from hence that any of these are
more properly and literally in God, after the manner that
they are in us, than Hands or Eyes, than Mercy, Love,
or Hatred are; but·on the contrmissionary we must acknowledge
·that those things, which we call by these Names, when attributed
to God, are of fo very different a nature from
what they arc in us, and fo stiperior to all that we can ~- .
ceive, that in reality there is no more likene& between
them, than between our Hand and God's Power : n<>r c~
we draw Consequenees from the real Nature of one to th•t
of ·the other with more justnefS of Reafon, than we can
conclude, because our Hand confrlb of Fingers and Joints,
that theresore the Power of God is distinguilhed PY .fucJi.
Parts.

And theresore to argue because Fore-knowledge, as it is
in us, if supposed infallible, cannot consist with the Contingeney
of Events, that theresore what we call fo in God
cannot, is as far from Reafon, as it would be to .conclude,
because. our Eyes· cannot fee in the dark, that theresore,,
when God is said to fee· all things, his Eyes .must be enlightened
with a perpetual Sun1hine ; or because we cannot
love or hate without Paffion, that theresore when the Scriptures
ascribe these to God, they tcaeh us that he is as.liable
~ these Affeeao111 as we are. - --- · · - ·
'· -- - - . --· .W e

' We ought theresore to interpret all these things whm
tttributed to God, as thus expressed only by way of condescension
to our .Capacities, in order to help us to ·conceive
·what we are to expca from him, and what Duty wt
are to pay him; and particulariy, that the terms of Foreknowledge,
Predestination, nay, of U iiderstanding and ~
Will, when ascribed to him, are not to be taken fttia:ly or
properly., nor are we to think that they are in hiin ·after the
fairie manner or in the fame sense that we find them in ourselyes;
but on the contrmissionary, we are to interpret them only
by way of Analogy and Comparison. · .
That is to fay, when we ascribe Fore-knowledge to him, we mean. that he can no more be surprized with any thing
that happens, than a wife Man1 that foresees an Event,
can be Tl1rprized when it comes to pass ; nor can he any
more be at a loss what he is to do in fut;;h a Ca~ than a
~fe Man can, who is most persealy acquainted with all
Accidents which may obftrua: his De.sign, and has pro-
'rided against them. · ·

§ VII. So when God is said to pmletmnine and fureordain
all things according to the Counfel of his Will, the
importance of this Expresiion is, that all things depend as
much on God, as if he had settled them according to a
certain Scheme and de.sign, which he had voluntarily fra.
med in his own Miod, without regard had t& any other
consideration besides that of his cwn meer Will and Plea:..
sure.

If then \Ve understand Predetermination 1111d Predeft:ination
in this analogous Senfe,. to give us a N &tion of the
irresistible .Power. of God~ and of that supreme Dominion
he may exereise over his Creatures, it will help us to uilderstand
what the Sovereignty is that God has over us, the
Submission that we ought to pay him, arid the Depen-·
·danee we have upon him. ·

But it no ways follows from hence that this is ineonsistent
with the Contingeney of Events, or Free-Will. And
from hence it appears what it is that makes us apt to think
fo : which is only this, that we find in ourselyes when we
determine to ® a: thing, and arc able to do what we have · - - · - - · resolvetl
resolved on, that thing cannot be contingent to us : .AJicf
if God's Fore-knowledge and Predetermination were of the;
fame nature with ours, the fame· Ineonsistency would be
justly inferred. But I have already shewed that they are noc
of the fame kind, and that they are only ascribed to him by
way of Analogy and Comparison, as Love and Mercy,.
and other Paffions are ; that they are quite of another
nature, and that we have no proper Notion of them, any
more than a Man born blind has of Sight and Colours a
and theresore that we ought no more to pretend, to deter•
mine what is confdlent or not consistent with them, than
a blind Man ought to determine, from what he hears or
feels, to what Objects the sense of Seeing reaches : for this
were to reason from things that are only comJ>aratively
and improperly ascribed to God, and by way of analogy
and accommodation to our Capacities, as if they were properly
and univocally the fame in him and in us.

If we would f peak the Truth, those Powers, Properties
and Operations, the Names of which :we transfer to God;
are but faint Shadows and Resemblances, or rath~ indeed
Emblems and parabolical Figures of the Divine AttributeS,
which they are defJgDed to signify ; whereas his Attributes
are the Originals, the true real Things, of a Nature fo in-·
finitely superior and different .from any thing we discem
in his Creatures, or that can be conceived by finite Underfrandings,
that we cannQt with reason pretend to make any
other Deducaons from the Natures of one to that of the
others, than those he has allowed us to make, or extend
the Parallel any sarther than that very lnstanee, which the
resemblance was designed to teach us.

Thus Fore-knowledge and Predestina.t.ion, when ~buted
to God, are designed to teach us the Obligations which
we owe to him for our Salvation and the Depel)danee we
have on his Fayour; and fo far we may use and press them.:
but to conclude from thence that these are ineonststent with
Free-Will, is to suppose that they are the fame in him and
us; and just as reasonable .as to infer, because Wifdom is
~ compared in Scripture to a Tree of Life, that theresore it
grows in the Earth, has its Spring and fall, and is warmed
by the Sun and fed by the .JWn.

§ VIIL.
§ Vlll. And this brings me to ,the second Head which
I proposed to myself in this Discourse, which was to shew
you, Why God '"'' bta'Uenly things are after this manner
representea·10 tu ill' holy Scripture. And the first Reafon I
:shall offer is that we must either be content to know them
this way, or not at all. I have already told you, and I believe
every considering Man is convineed, that the Nature
and PerseClions of God, as he is in himself, are such that it
is impossible we .lhould comprehend them, especially in the
present State of Imperseaion, lgr:iorance, and Com1ption
in which this World lies. He is the Objed: of none of our
Senfes, by which we receive all our direet and immediate
·Perception of things ; and theresore if we know any thing
of him at all, it must be by deduaions of Rcafon, by A~
ogy and Comparison, by resembling him to something
that we do know and are acquainted with.
· 'Tis by this way we arrive at the most noble and usesul
Notions we have, and by this Method we teach and instruCl:
OthCJ"s. Th~ when we would help a Man to some Conception
of any thing that has not falien within the reach
of his Senfcs, we do it by comparing it to something that
·already has; by offering him some Similitude, Resemblance,
or Analogy, to help his Conception. As for example, to give
a Man a Notion of a Country to which he is a Stranger,
'&nd to make him apprehend its Bounds and Situation, we
produce a Map to him ; and by that he obtains as much
knowledge of it as serves him for his present purpose. · Now
a Map is only Paper and Ink, diversified with several
Strokes and Lines, which in themselyes have little likeness
to Earth, Mountains, Valleys, Lakes and Rivers. Yet none
can deny but by Proportion and Analogy they are very In-
· ftruaive; and if any should imagine that these Countries
arc really Paper, because ,the Maps that represent them are
made of it, and should feriousiy draw Conelusions from that
· Supi:ofition, he would expose his Understanding, and make
himself ridieulous : And yet such as argue from the faint
Resemblances that either Scripture or Reafon give of the
di~ne Att?!butes and Operations, and proceed in their Reafomng.
s as jf thcfe must in all resp. eCts answer one anothsearl,l
fall into the fame Abfw-dities that those would be guilty·~
who should think Countries mufi: be of Paper, bei:aW: the
Maps. that represent them are .fo. ·

To apply this more particulariy to the C~ bef~ us :
We ascribe Decrees and Predestination to God; because the
lhings signisied by these words bear some rcfcmblance to
certain PCrfetl:ions that we believe to be in him. But if we
·. remember that they arc only Similitudes and Representations
of them, and that there is as little likeness between the one
and the other, as between the Countries and Maps which
represent them ; and that the likeness lies not in the Na.
ture of them.; but in some particular Efsect or Circpergamumstana;
that is in some Measure common to both.: we must ac.
kiiowledge it very unreasonable to expea that they 1hould
answer one another in all things : or because the diflerent
Repreientations of the fame thir_ig can't be exattly adj~ed
in every particular, . that theresore the thing represented is
ineonsntent in itself.

Fore-knowledge and Decrees are only afiigncd to God
to give us a Notion of the Steddinefs and Certainty of the
divine ACtions ; .and if fo, for us to conclude that what is represented
by them is ineonsistent with the Contingeney of Events
or Free-Will, because the things represenring (I mean
our Fore-knGwledge and Decrees) are fo, is the fame A~
furclity, ~.it is to conclude, that Cbi1111 is no bigger than a
Sheet of Paper, because the Map, that represents it, is contained
in. that cqmpass.

§ IX. This seems to me a material Point, and theresore
I will endeayour to illulira~e it with an Instanee or two
moi:e_. f:v:ery ~y is satisfied that Time, M~ ~d Velocity,
are SubJeFb of very usesul Knowlec!ge;, and that ad,.
justing and discovering the Proportions that these bear to
one another, is perhaps all that is prositable in natural Philosophy.
How is it dien, that we proceed in our Demon...
fuatjoi:is coneerning these ? Is it not by representing Time
by a Line, the Degrees of Velocity by another, and the Motion
that results fr.om both, by a Superficics or a Solid?
And from these we draw Conelusions, which are not only
very ttue, but also of great Moment to Ans and Sciences »
. uid

and ne"VCi- fail m our Dedudions, while we keep justly to
the Analogy and Proportion they bear to one another in the ·.
Production of natural Effefls ; neither is it easy, . nor per"
haps possible, to come at such .Knowledge any other way.
Yet in the nature of the thing,. there is no great Simili•
tude between a Line and Time ; and it will not be obvious
to a Perfon, who is not acquainted with the method of the
ikilful in such Matters, to conceive how a Solid .1hould an•
fwer the compounded Effed: of Time and· Motion .. But ·if
any, instead of endeayouring to understand the Mer.hod and
Proportions used by the Learned in such Cases, in order to
dif~ver to them these usesul Truths, 1hould rejeCl: the 'Yhole
as a thing impossible ; aliedging that we make Time a permanent
thing and existing alltogether, because a Line :whiclt
represents it in this Scheme is fo ; we should think that he
hardly deserved an Anfwer to such a foolish Objection.
And yet of this nature are most, if not all, the ObjeCl:ions
that are commonly made against the Representatiom.
that the Scripture gives us of the divine Nature, and of
the M yfteries of our Religion.. · · · · ·

§ X. Thus the holy Scriptures represent to us that Dj'"
ftinetion which we are obliged to believe to be in the
Unity of God, by that of Three Perfons, and the Relation
they bear to one another, by that of a Father to his Son,
and of a Man to his Spirit : And those that object againsi:
this, ·and infer that these must be three Substanees, because
three Perfons among Men are fo, do plainly forget that
these are but Representations and Resemblances ; and fall
into the fame absurd way of reasoning that the former· do,
who conclude, that we make Time a permanent thing, lJe..
cause a Line is fo, by which we represent it. · · · · .

'§ XI. ,A.gain,. if we were to describe to an ignorant .American
what was meant. by Writing, and told him that it is .
a way of making words visible and permanent, fo that Perfons
at any distinee of Time and Place, may be able to fee
and understand them: The Description would seem very
ftralige fo him, and he might object that the thing must be
impafilble, for Words are not to be seen but heird ; , they
pats in the Speaking, and it is impossible they should assea
• the
the Absent, much ldS tij.ofe that live in distant Ages_. To
which there need no other answer, than to inform liim that
there are other fort of Words, beside those he knows, that
are truly calied fo, because equivalent to. such as are spoken.;
that they have both the fame use, and serve equally to
communieate our Thoughts to. Qnc another ;. and that if
he will but have patience, and ipply himself to learn, he
will soon understand, and be convineed of the Pofsibility
and Ufefu!neis of the thing : And none can doubt but. he
were much to blame, and aCl:ed an unwise part, if he refused
to believe the Perfon that offered to instruCl: him, or
negleeted to make the Experishent.
And fore, when any one objects against the Pefsibility
of the Three Perfons of the Trinity in one God, it is every
whit as good an Anfwer to tell such an Obje8:or that there
· are other fort of Perfons besides those we fee among
Men, whose Perfonality is as truly different from what we
call fo, as a Word written is different from a Word fpok.en,
and yet equivalent to it. And though three Perfu115i such
as Men are, can't be in one hpergamuman Nature, as a WQl'd
spoken can't be visible and permanent : yet what we call
three Perfons by Comparison. and Analogy, may consist in
the Unity of the Godhead.
And after the fame manner we ought to answer those
who object against the Fore-knowledge and Decrees of God,
as ineonsistent with the Freedom of Choice, by telling them
that though such Fore-knowledge and Decrees as are in
our Understanding and Wills, cannot consist with Contingeney,
if we suppose them certain : yet what we call fo ia
God may, being quite of a different Nature, and only
calied by those Names, by reason of some Analogy and
Proportion which is between them.
And if Men will but have patience, and wait the proper
time, when Faith shall be pCrfeCl:ed into Vilion, and we
fhaH know even as we are known ; they may then fee and
be as well satisfied that there is no Absurdity in the Trinity
of Pcrfons, or Fore-knowledge of Contingeney, as the
Indian is, when he has learned to read and write, that dierc
is no impossibility in visible and permane;nt W O{ds.
§XII.
· §XII. Lajlly, It is observable, . that no Care, lndustry,
or ·Infuuetion, can ever give a Pcrfon born, and continuing
blind, any Notion of Light; nor can he ever have any
Conception ho:w Men who lsave Eyes diseern the Shape
and Figure of.a thing at a distanee, nor imagine what Colours
· mean : And yet he would, I believe, readily (on the
account he receives from others, of the Advantage of knowing
these things) endure Labour and Pain, and submit to
the most difficult and tormenting Operations of Physick
and Chirurgery, in order to obtain the use of his Eyes, if
any reasonable hope could be given him of the Success of
such an Undertaking. And why then 1hould not yve as
willingly submit to those eaf y Methods which God has preseribed
to us, in order to obtain that Knowledge of his
N acure and Attributes, in which our eternal Satisfaetion and
Happinefs hereaster is in a very great measure to consist ?
And 'tis certain we now know as much of them as the
blind Man, in the Cafe fopposed, does of Light or Colours
; and have better reason to seek, and more certain
hope of attaining ~n the next Life to a fuller and a more
compleat ·Knowledge, than foch a Man can have with relation
to the use of his Eyes, and the advantage of.feeing.
And then will nothe rife up in Judgment against us, and
condemn us ? Since he endures fo much to obtain Sight
on the imperseCl: Representations of it made to him by
other Mefi, whilst we will not believe and endure as much
for .eternal Happinefs, on the Teftimony of God.

§XIII. If it be asked, Why these things are not made
clearer to us.? I answer, for _the fame Reafon that.Light
and Colours are not clear to ·one that is born blind, even
hecause in this imperseet State we want Faculties to discem
them : And we cannot ex:pea to reach the Knowledge of
them whilst here, for the fame reason that a Child, whilst
h~ is fo, cannot f peak and discourse as he doth when a
grown Man ; there is a Time and Seafon for every thing,
and we must wait for that Seafon. There is another' State
·and Life for the clear diseeming of these Matters ; but in the
mean time we ought to take the Steps and Methods whicl\
are proper for our present Condition : And i_f we will not
li h · do
do fo, we can no more eXpc:Ct: to arrive to the knewle<lge
Of these ·nece.lfmissionary Triiths, or that State which \'V'i9.1 mak~
mein plam to 'us, than a Child cilft hope he shall 'ever be
able to read and write, 'who will not be pel'fwdtd '.fO go to
School, or -obey his Mafter. .

This aMlogical Knowledge bf 'Ged's Ninii'e aftd Attributes,
is all ":of which we ·are capable at present; 4h<1 ·'ti'e
im.ill: either be contented tb koow lHm thu~ -(1r At 'flown
with an intire Ignorance and Neglea: df God, 1mil lfinally
def pair of future Happinefs. Bat it ~oneerns :tl& !ft•atly
to callio mind the Apostle's'ObfeMtfon, ·1.Cor.13.112. For
now we foe 1hroug'b iz Glass darkly, !JUt then ftHt;to ftt(t; ~ow
t lmMv in part, out tbm I shall lmO'lb ·e<am as 1 am 'known.
1Ch.oagh our present knowledge ·df divine Things :be very
irilpetsect, yet it is ·enaugh to awaken oor detire df·rhdre ;
and though we do not ·understand me Enjoyments Of rile
Blessed, yet the Description we have of:them is sassicient to
engage us to seek after _them, ana to prdfecute die Met!lwds
preseribed ·in Scripture for ·attainioo them. . .

·i XIV. And there.fore let me:offer it :as a second Reafo.n
whf. God .a~d di\t~n~ .Things ~re thus 'repres~ted 'to iu~ m
Scnpture, 'VIZ. That such Knawletlge is fulfici~rit to an the
~nrent:S and Purpases of 'R.eligidn ; ·t11e Design wht!roof is
~o -lead ·us in ~t~e way to eternal· Happih~fs, anti in omer
thereunto, to teach and 'oblige us t-0 live ·reasonably, =tb
perform· our Duty !to God, ·our _Neighhours, -end -etirtelyes,
tQ conquer and mortisy ·otir Paffi<>ns, ·and Lutts, :to :make
its benefieent and charitable :to Men, ·anti to <&blige us ~o
IO\re, ·obey, and depend•upoh ·God.

· . Now it is _cafy 1to 1hew, th'at:such·a Khbwlecige:lfs 1Iibave
~Cfcrib'ed, is fussldenno•obrain all these Ends : Fm- though
I know ·nOt what-God is ih 'himself, ·yet ;if •I :be~ve.· he :is abl~
to ~rt:or·help_'me, to rna~e me 'happy'or .tnlfeir.ible,
~ ~b~ ts sufficient to·corrvmce me, tf.htit it~• my .D1Jty
to sear ·him. If I be aJsured ·that all -his Worlei "lfre ·&Jrre
With Regularity, 'Order, and •Fithess·; 't'hlt :nOthilt~ di,11
surprize or disappoint him, that ·he can ·never be·ih··E1o~,
~r at a loss what is proper for "him to do ; !fhough ·I :do n(?l
comprehend the Faculties by which he ·~rms 'fo -m:inf
t admiact.
irable an4 amazing ~, yet I knew enough to make
me: adore aad admire bis Conduct. Jf I be iatisfied that I
can no mcxie mpeB: co ~ free, when I break the Lawi
and Rules '1e bas pxfcribCd me, than .a Subject can who
• ..i&u1ts his P~ in the mi~ft of all his Guards ; thiS is
Ol()ugh to make me cautious about every Word I speak,
and .f:'/tty Aaion I ~rm, and lX> put ~e out of all hol?f
of dCap\ng whm l .o&"end him.
If I am OOAvineed that God will ·be .as freddy · to theRwles
he Jias pr.escribed fur my Deportment as a wife ancl
jwt Prince :will be to his La.ws ; .this alone will oblige me
to a stria: Observation of the .divine commands, and a1sure
tne mat ;I must be judsed according as I ha.ve kept .or .
ttanfgce6Cd them.

If a man be convineed .that by his .Sins he has forseitecl
all Right and Titile t.o Happiadi, .and that God is under ne
ObligaciQA to-~thim pll'don.for .them; that only the free
Ma-Cy of.Gocf can ·put rpergamum intg the way of Salvation ; ani .
Chat he may as wetl w.ithout Imputation ;\llCl lnjustice, .par ..
&n ene, and ·P* by-anocher, as a Prince may, of many
eqJJBl M~, .repr.ieve one for an instanee m his Mer~
.f:Jf '8.ll'1 ~wcr, ·and fuf'er die .reft to be carried to Execu ..
4lA: If a man, I fay, &ds himsdf under .these .C\rcpergamum ..
stanees, he <Will have .die fasne .Obligations .of Gratitude ·tQ
his God, ·that the _pardoned Offender owes to his Prince,
end :impose •his Ficape intirely to the .peculiar Favo1,Jr of
~, .that ·made che 1Distinaion ·betwt=en him and others
atithout any .regard :to their .l\4erits.
'Jf -we !bdlieVe .chat .there is a .:Oistinenon in the .manner of
1lie subsdling of the .divinC Nature, .that ·requires such par.
war A~ons .from .us to ·God as we pay to three
-dM\inB: :Ptifgns 'here ; aid . that ·he has such distinet and
~y different Relations -to himself and to us · on .this
'8GOOU~ '86 ·tlwe Men .have ·to one .another ; that is e~
· te -0~ige us -to pay our Addrefies to him as th~
· ~Sli"and toexpe& as -~t BonesilS·and.Bless~
Mm '1iisn -under this Distinaion, as .we.~ from .differ..
~nt Pcrfoo.s here : And it can be no him~.rance to our Duty.,
4hat iwe-ue iporant ¢ tihe .nature and '1anner of that DU:
4in6lien.
. Hha Let
Let us confider how many honour and obey their Prince,
.who never faw him, who never had any personal Knowledge
of him, and could not distiflguHh him from another
Man if they should meet him. This will shew us, that it is
not necessmissionary that we should perfo-iaJly know our Governor,
to oblige us to perform our Duty to him : And if many
perform their Duty to their Prince without knowing him,
why should it seem strange that we should be obliged to do
our Duty to God, though we do not know any more of his
Perfon or Nature but that he is our Creator and Governor ?
L(!jlly, To shew that this kind of Knowledge is fussici.ent
for Salvation, let us suppose one who takes all the Defc.riptions
we have of God literally, who imagines him to be a
mighty King that fits in Heaven, and has the Earth for his
Footstool; that at the fame ti~ hath all things in his view
which can happen ; that has thousands and thousands of
Mip.isters to attend him, ~l ready to obet and execute his
Commands; that has a great Love and Fayour for such
as diligently obey his Orders, and is in a Rage and Fury
against the Difobedient; Could any one doubt but he, w}l.o
in the simplicity of his Heart should believe these things,
as literally represented, would · be saved by virtue of that
· Belief, or that· he would not have ~odyes strong enough
to oblige him .to love, honour, and obey God ?

If it should be objected that such Representations do not
exactly answer the Nature of Things, I confess this is true;
but I would desire you to confider, that the heft Represenptions
we can make of God are infinitely short of the Truth,
and that the impersections of such Representations wiU.never
be imputed to us as a Fault, provided~ we do not wilfully
dishonour him by unworthy Notions, and OW'. Con_
ceptions of him be such as m~y f ufficiently eblige us to perform
the Duties he requires at our hands. · .
And if any on~ sarther ahedges that he who takes these Re-
' presentations literally, will be involv'd in many Difficultiea,
.and that it will be easy to shew that there are great lneonsistences
in them, if we-understapd them ~cor04tg to the
,l..etter. .

~I answer, He is to be look'd upon_ as very officious- and
impertinent, that will raise such Objections, and pu~ ·them
· · ·· in
in the Heads of plain, honest People, who by the force of
such common, though "figurative Knowledge (as it may be
term'd) practice the fobstantial and real Duties of Religion,
that lead them to eternal Happinefs. ·
'Tis true, when curious and buf y Perfons, by the un:.
seasonable abuse of their Knowl~, have- rais1d such Objections,
they must be answer'd: and it is then necetrmissionary to
lhew in what Senfe these Representatio~s ought to be ta.:.
ken ; and that they are to be understood by way of Comparison,
as Condescensions to our Weaknefs;
But though these Objections are eastly answer'd, yet he
who makes them unnecetrarily is by no means to be excused,
because they osten occasion disturbance to weak People.
Many that may ht: 1hock'd by the Difficulty, may not be
capable of readily understanding the Antwers : and theresore
thus to raise such Scruples, is to lay a Stpergamumbling-block
in the way of our weak Brethren, and perplex them with
Notions and Curiofities, the Knowledge of which is no way
necessmissionary to Salvation.
We ought theresore to confider that it was in great
Mercy and Compassion to the Ignorance and Infirmity of
Men, that the holy Spirit vouchsafed to rove us such-. Representatioris
~f the divine Nature and Attributes. ·H~
knew what Knowledge was most proper for us, and what
would most essetl:ually work on us to perform our Duty :
and if we take things as the Scripture repreknts them, it
can't be deny'd but they are well adapted to our Capacities,
and must have a mighty Infl.uence on all that sineerely believe
them, in. truth greater than all those nice Speculation~
that we endeayour to substitute in their Place. .
§·XV. But thirdly, If we confider feriousiy the Know~
ledge that we have of the Creatures,. and even of tho{e
things in ti.us World with which we are most familiarly
acquainted, · i~ will appear that the Conceptions we have of
them, are much of the fame fort as those are which Religion
gives us of God, and that they neither represent the
N aturc or etrential Properties of the things as. they are in
themselyes, but only the Efsects they have in relation to us.
For in most Cases we know no more of them but Qnly
' how they assect us, and what Senfations they produce in us.
, · Hh 3 Thus
'
Thus for eaantplc, Light and the Sun arc the !Tleft fa.
miliar and nfeful things in nanu-e : we have the comforu•
blc Perception of them by our Senfes of Seeii\g and Feel·
ing, and enjoy the Benefit and Advantage of them; but
what they are iri themselyes, we are intirely ignorant.
I think it is agreed by most th:tt write ot· NattJtal Phf ..
losophy, that Light and Colours are nothing but the Ef.
feels of certain Bodies and Motions On our Senie of Seeinf.
and that there are no such things at all irt Nature, _but only
in our Minds : and of this at least we may be sure, that .
Light i.ti the Sun br Air, are very different things from
what they are in our Sefifations of them; yet we call bodl
by the fame Name, and term that which is only perhaps a
111otion in the Ait, Light, because it begets in us ~
9>nception which is truly Light. But it would seem very
strange to the generality of Men, if we should tdl them.
that there is no Light in_ the Sun, or Colours in the ~
bow; and yet strialy .speakin~ it is certa,in, that whkh ih the
Sun causes the Conception of Light in us, ~ as cruly dif..
ferent ih nature frotn the Representation we have of it in
our Mindt as OW' Fore-Khowledge is from what we call I)
in God.

.. j XVI. The 1hmc may be observed tortteming the ()b..
jetb of our oth~r Senfes, fileh as H~t and Cold* Sweer.,
and Bitter, ana w~ch we ascribe to the thl!lgs that aftCa
~lir Tbuch and Tafi:e. Whereas it is trtanistdt, chat: these
are only the Senfations that the Acnons of vutward thintta
produce in us. For the Fire that bUms \II lw no fpergamum
J.>ain in it as we feelt when· we complain of it's heat i Mt
Ice, . such as we call Cold.
. NMrertheless we call the Things,. whoie Aatoni Oh our
Senfes cause these Senfations in us, by the fame Name wt
givt to out Conceptions of than, and t:ttat ind speak '1f
shem; as if they were the fame. We fa7 the Fn ia .~
' because it produteth heat ih us • and that the ·SYR is light,
\>tcause it asseCl:s our Eyes in such manlier, aa cnabla ua t.o
ftame that Thought which we then l'etceivt in ot.nfclftS.
But in the mean time we are altogether ignotuc, what it
is particularis in the Fire ami the Swt, dtat hlls didi: HI.
seat
fee\$ ~n Qt_, QI:' ~ow it c.o~~ th~s ~a a[~ us.. ~nd yet this
lporwce Qf ows dQth npc hiqc!er t~s from the U fe or Ad.
Ya11tage1 t~ Nat.ur~ design'd us in t~~ Senfations; ~or
dees our tl'$Jl~erring to the Objects themselyes the Names
tliat ~ gi.ve oqr QWQ .P~~ep.ti<,>0.s qf them, draw any evµ
(;Qn.feq\lene~ iester it : QP die co~~rmissionary, ~h~y serve the U~
~s of Li.fo, a.s well ~ if we ~W the very things ·themilve,
s. The Slm b.y giving me the Senfation of Light,. directs
and refreshes me, as much as if I .lro~w what its ·Na.tUfC
ucl we Subftapee are. for ~n truth, Men are no far-
, ~ COC\@.fnQd. W know the N!ltµre of any thing, th~ ¥
IC relat($ lQ them, aacl li~~ fQ~~ e~ett o~ them. l\n~ lf
thq J.mpw U\o EffQCts of 9Utw~rd things, apd how far they
are to use or avoid tl\em, it i~ (4fflci~t.
If~ fU'-h Kn1>wledw= of natqral $ipgs, as o~y ·1hews
the elfeets they have o~ \ls, b~ fqflicient io !1)1 ~he Ufes of
Life, d\Qugh we; do not· know wh!lt th~y ~re in th~rriselyes ;
why 11\Quld OQJ .the like Rqmisept~gn Qf G<>Q ~~ ~ At~
ributes be sufficient for the Ends of ~~~pg, w.~ugh we
be ignQl'IUl~ Qf his ;md tb~ir N~~ i ·
Every Qlle k.now!i tMt ~teddi_11efs, ~Ce;l,llafity, ~Q Or- .
de.r, do alway3 prcx:"d fr9Jn Wi(dQm~ W~e~ theresore we
obforve ihefe in t:h~ high~ ~ in All ~lit: W <?rks qf
God, 1haU we not ~y ID~~ God is infinitely. wife, J>ecaufu
we are igllQ"1lt wh3t that ~~y is iP iefe!f which prqduc~
such ftu~dous Effetb ? thoqgh ~fo~r Ill! Wifdo~, ~ ip
us, be as ditsen:nt froJD wh~t we c~ fo i~ GC?d; a,s Light
in. e>ur Cpru;eptien is qi.ff~rQD~ frqJD me Mf!!i~,, ip the Air
that Ca.uses it. · · · ·

§. XVII. W r. all ef 1,1~ feel ~ teadcu,u:y ~Q ~e Earth,
flhic;h we (1)11 Grt/lo#y ; but JlQn~ ever yet w~ llble to giv:e
any fa~fath>ry acc()uJlt of its Nature or G~qfe: but inasmuch
as we ~ow dl~t f:J.]ling QQwn a Precipice will cru1h
111 t~ pieces, the Senfe we MYe of this ;Effed: of it, is fussident
to make ~ ~ ~o •vaid such a Fall. And in lik,e
manner, if we know that b~.~pg Gqd'~ Commanels wiJI
proyoke him to d,estroy us, will not this be sufficient 1to oblige
us t:o Obedience, though we be igno~~ · wh!lt it is
we call .d!lger jn birri ?
§ XVIIL
§XVIII. I might go through all the Notices we have
of natural Things, and shew that we only know and distinguish
them by the EffeCls they produce on our Senfes~
and make you sensible that such Knowledge· sufficiently
fen·es the Purposes of Life. And no Reafon can be given
why the Representations given us in Scripture of God and
divine Things, though they do only shew us the EffeCl:s
that ~roceed from them, should not be f ufficient to anfwet
the fu..pofcs of Religion. .
Particulariy we ascribe Fore-knowledge to God, because
we ·are certain .that he cannot be surprized by any Event,
nor be at any loss what he is to do when it happens. And
thereby we give him all the Perfutlion we can, and alsure
ourselyes that we cannot deceive him. .
After the fame manner we ascribe Predestination to him,
and conceive him as predetermining every thing that comes
to pass, because all his Works are as steddy and certain, as
if he had predetermined thein after the fame manner ~t
wite Men do theirs.
We sarther represent him as absolutdy free,. and all his
Aetions as arising only from himsdft without any other
Confideradon but that of his own \Vill ; because we are
fore, the Obligations we owe to him are as great as if he
atted in this wife. We are as much obliged to magnify his
free Mercy and Fayour to us, to hpergamumble our Minds before
him, and return our tribute of Gratitude to him, as if our
Salvation intirely proceeded from his mere Good-will and
'Pleasure, without any thing being- required on our pan in
order to it .

. §XIX. Let me in the fourth Place observe, that as we
transfer the Attions of our own Minds, our Powers, and
Virtues, by analogy to God, and speak of him as if he haf)t
the like ; fo we proceed the fame way in the Representations
we make to one another of the Actions of our Minds, and
afcrihe the Powers and Faculties of Bodies to the .Transactions
that pass in them. Thus .. to weigh things, to penetrate,
to renea:, are.proper A&ons of Bodies, which we transfer
to our U nderstandings, and commonly fay, that the Mind
wei0hs or penetrates things, that it refietts on it;self, . or
Attion&;

AC\:ions ; thus· to embrace or rejetl:, to retain or let nlp, arc
corporelil Performanees, and yet we nscribe the first to the
Will, and the last to the Memory. And it is manisest that
this docs not cause any Confusion in our Notions : thougl1
none will deny but there is a vast differenee between weighing
a. piece of Money in 4a. Scale, ~d considering a thing 41
our Minds; between one Body's passing thro' another, which
is properly penetrating, and the Understanding's obtaining
a dear. Notion of a thing hard t<;> be comprehended. And
fo in all the reft, there is indeed a resemblance and -analogy
between them, which makes us give the fame Names to
ach.: . but to compare them in all parti~ulars, and ex~B:
they. should exaaly answer, would run us into great Absurdities.
As for example, it wo~d be ridieulous to think
that weighing a thing in our Minds should have all the Efsea:
s, ·and be accompany'd with all the Circpergamumstanees that
are observable in weighing a Body. ·

. S XX. Now to apply this, let us confider that Love,,
Hatred, Wifdom, Knowledge, and Foreknowledge, are
properly Faculties or ACl:ions of our.Minds; and we ascribe
them to God after the fame manner that we do ResteCl:ion,
Penetrating, Difcovering, Embracing, or Reject:ing, to our
intelied:ual ACl:ions and Faculties, because there is some
analogy and proportion between them. But then we ought
to remember that there is as great a differenee between theft;
when attributed to God, and as they are in us, as between
weighing in a Balance and Thinkil)g, in truth infinitely
greater ; and that we ought no more to expect: that the oric
fuould in all respect:s and Circpergamumstanees answer the other,
than . that Thinking in all things should corref pond to
Weighing. Wou'd you not be furpriz'd to hear a Man deny7
and obftinatdy persist in it, that his Mind can rested:
upon it fdf, because it is iinpossible that a Body, from
whence the Notion is originally taken, should move or a.Ct
on itself; And is it not equally absurd to argue that what
we call Fore-knowledge in God, cannot consist with the
Contingeney or Freedom of Events, because 011r Prescience,
from.whence we transfer the Notion to the divine Understanding,
could not, if it were certain? And is it not equally
. _ a fussta
sufficient answer to both, when we far that tb.o Refleaioo
of Bodi~ tho' in many Circpergamumstance5 it resemblea that
.Ashon of the ·Mind which we <:all Co, yet in other Pa,nic:ulars
tkey are mighty unlike ? And tho' the Fote-know.ledge
that we have in some things, resemblet what we term • ia
God, yet the Properties and Eire& of thefo in ~ ~
ticulars, are infinitely different. ·
Nor can we think that whatever is impossible in the one.
must be likewise fo in the other. 'Tis impoaible Motiaa
1hould be in a Body, except it be 111qv'd by another, °hi:t
JOme other external Agent • a.nd it requires a Space in w ·
it is peifyrm'd, .and we can measure it by Feet and Yarda •
but we lliould look on him as a very weak Reafoo.er, that
would deny any Mot;ion to be in the Mind, becaufC he
could find none of those there. And we lhould think that
we. had sufficiently answer1d this ObjeCtion, by telling him
that these two Motions ~e of very different Natures, tho•
there be some analogy and proportion between them. ,And
lhall not the fame Anfwer satisfy those that argue again!
.che divine .Fore-knowledge, Predestination, and other AB:ions
attributed to God, because many things are supposed
. possible to them, which are impoWble to us ? · ' .

. §· XXI. It may be obje8:ed against this Dod:rinc that if
it be true, all our Descriptiom.s of God, and Discourses con_.
cerning him, will be. only Figures and Metaphors ; that he
will be only figuratively mercisul, just, intelligent, and
fore-knowing : and perhaps in time, Religion and all the
.Myfteries thereo~ will be loft in mere Figures.
But I answer, that there is great differenee between the
analogical Representations of GOd, and that which we commonly
call Figurative. · The common use of Figures is to
represent things that are otherwise very well knoWn, in such
a manner as may magnilie or ldfen, heighten or adom the
Ideas we have of them. And the deftgn of putting them
in this foreign Drefs, as we may tall it, is to move cu
Paffions, and ingage our Fancies more eft"eCtually than the
true and naked view of them is apt to .do, or pahap
.ought. And frorn hence it too osten happens that t1u¥
·Figures are employ'd to .~ceive \JS, and make µs.dlink
.better or worse of things than they realfy deserve. · ·
But
Bue she Analogies and Similimdes that the holy Seri~
tore• or G\U' '1Wn Rea.fon frame of divine Thmss, are Of
another naMe, the use of i:beiD is tQ give us iOrite NocioA
ef things wheNQf we have no diRCl: Knowledge, and by
that means lead \is to a P~eption of che Nature, ·or·at
least of some of. the Properties and EifeB:.s of what our
Underl\:amlipga 4;1nnot direaly reach, and in this Cafe to
Jeach UI ho• we art r.o behaYe O\ri:lyes towards God, and
what we are to do in order to obtain a mgre perfc:Ck Know~
ledge Di his Attribura.

§ XXII. And whereas in ordinmissionary figurative Representa·
tiona, che thing exptt.fs'd by the Figure is commonly of
much less moment than that to which it is compar'd : in
chdt Analogl~s the Cafe is otherwise, and the things repre-
. {ented by them have much more Reality and PerseClion in
diem• than the things by which we rcprd"ent..them. Thus
weighing a thing in our Minda, ii a much more noble and
perfca Actic;>n, than examining the Gravity of a Body by
Scale and Balance. which is the original Notion from
•hence it is borrow'd1 and Restession as in our Understandinga
is much more confiderable than the rebounding
of one hard Body from another, which yet is the literal
Scnfe of Refleaion. And after the fame manner, what we
tall Knowledge and Fore--Knowledge in God, have in6.Aitely
more reality in them, and are of greater moment
than our Undtrstanding or Prescience, trom whence they
arc transferrd to him 1 and in truth, these as in Man ~
but faint Communieations of the divine Pcrseaions, which
we the tnte Originals, and which our Powers and Faculties
more im~y imitate. than a Pi&Jrc does a Man: and
jet 'if .\1e reason from them b}' Analogy and Proportion,
.they are (Wficient to give us such a Notion of God's Attributes,.
as will oblige \II to sear, love_ obey, and adore
·Mm. .

. If we ~y thc(e ~ngs to2ether, I suppose, they will fur-
. 11ilh us with fulficient RcaiOns to satisij us why the holy
&:riptures represent Divine things to us- by Types and Similitucb,
by Compuisons md Analogict. and by transfming
to GOd th~ "Notions of such ~ons as ~ob-
1ervc
serve in our selyes, or other Creatures : fmce it appears that
we are not capable of better ; that such Knowledge an·
fwers all the Designs of· Religion ; and that when the_ Matter
is duly examin'd, we hardly know any thing without our
selyes in a more perreB: manner. · ·
I shall theresore proceed to the third and last thing I propos'd,
which was to shew the Ufes we ought to make of
what has been said, particulariy of God's fore-knowing and
predestinating his EleCt to Hc>liness and Salvation. .

§ XXIII. And first, from the whole it appears that we
ought not to be furpriz'd, when we find the Scriptures
giving different and seemingly contractictory Schemes of
-Divine thing~.· .

It is manisest that several such are to be found in holy
Writ. Thus God is :frequently said in Scripture, to repent
and turn from the Evil that he purpos'<l against Sinners ;
. and yet in other places we are told, that God is 11ot a 1ld"a1i
that be should lye, neither the Son of Man that he jh1uld repent:
·So Npergamumb. 23. ·1·9. Thus Pfal. 18. 11. God is represented
as dwelling in thick Darknefs : He made Darlenefs
his Jecret place; bis Pa'Uilion round a!Jout him, were darlc Waters,
and thick Clouds of the Sky.. And yet 1 '.fim. 6. 16. he
is describ'tl as dwelling i11 the Light which no Man can approach
unto, whom no Man hath Jeen, nor can Jee : And
I John I. 5· God is Light, and in him is no Darltnefs at an.
Thus in the second Commandment, God is represented as
visiting the Iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children,. unto
the third and fourth Generation of them that hate him :
and yet, Ezilc. 18. 20. 'J'he Son Jhall not /Jear the Iniquity
of the Father, neither /hall the Father hear the Iniquity of
the Son; and Ver. 4. 'J'he Soul that jinneth, it Jhall die.
After the fame manner, we are forbid by our Saviour,
Matt. 6. 7. to ufc 'Uain Repetitions as the Heathen JQ; or to
think that we shall be beard for our much.fpeaicing_; becaufo,
Ver. 8. Tour Father knows what things ye ha'Ue need of,
/Jefore ye aft him. And yet Luke 1 8. 1. we are encourag'd
always to pray, and not to fa~nt: And this is recommended
to u.c; by the Parable of an importunate Widow, . who thro•
her incdfant Applieations became uneasy to the Judge, and
. by
by her continual Cries and Petitions fo troubled him, that
to procure his own Eafe he did. her Juftice: Ver. 5. Becauft
this Widow troub/eth me, I will awnge her, 'left 'by her to11ti-
11ua/ toming Jhe wemissionary me. '

· Thus it is said, Exod. 3 3. 1 1. CJ'be Lord fpal:e unto Moses
fate. to faee, as a Man speaketh to bis Friend. And yet in
Ver. 20. he declares to the fame Mefes, CJ'hou canst not fte
my Face: for there jha/l ·no Man fte me, and live. There
are multitudes of other Instanees of the like nature, that
seem to carry some appearance of a Contradiaion in them,
but are purposely design'd to make us understand that these
are only afcrib'd to God by way of resemblance and analogy,
and to correct our Imaginations, that we may not mistake.
them for perseCl: ReprCsentations, or think that they are
in God in the fame manner that the Similitudes represent
them, and to teach us not to suetch those to all Cases, or
sarther than they are intended.

§ XXIV. We ought to remember, that two things inay
be very like Qne anodier in some ref peCl:s, and quite contrmissionary
in others ; and yet to argue against the Lik.enefs in one respect,
from the Contrariety in .the other, is as if ope should
dif pute ~inst the Likenefs of a PiCl:ure, because that is
made of Canvas, Oil, and Colours, w~ the Original is
Flefh and Blood.

· Thus in the present Cafe, ~ is represented as an absolute
Lord over his Creatures, of infinite Knowledge· and
·Power, that doth all things for his mere Pleasure, and is accountable
to none ; as one that will have Mercy on '!J)hom
he will have Mercy, and whom be will be hardens ; that forestes,
predejlinates, tails, justifies, and glorifies whom he will,
without any regard to the Creatures whom he thus deals
with. This gives us a mighty Notion of his Sovereignty,
at once stops our Mouths, and ftlenees our ObjeCl:ions;
obliges us to an absolute Submission, and ·dependanee on
him, and withal to acknowledge the good thing$ we enjoy
to be intirely due to his pleasure. This is plainly the Design
and EffeCl: of this terrible Representation : and the
meaning is, that we fhquld understand that God is no way
oblig'd to giv~ us an acCOWlt of his Aaions i that we ire
- · no

ud la ftJ1rJ Nmin '1e that fetWs hi•, and 'Worls RigbtetJt1f ·
•ft~ is «cepted wi1h bim, Actuo. 25. .

'S XXVI. Whoever is aequalnted with the holy Scripturts,
'9rill filld all these ·things plainly deliver'd in them.
Thus to ·lhew QS that God preposes no advantage to himklf
in his Dealings wklt \18, he .js described ·as a Penon wholly
.Usinterested : JulJ 'I. 2. ·2, 3. Can 11 Man /le 'PNJfitll/Jll nto
God, as be that is wife ""'Y bt prositull unto hi•self 1 ls 'ii
illy pkafare to the Almighty -that tho# art -righteOtlS I or is it
gain ·to ·him thtJt thou m&'/ceft thy w.,. per/ell 1 And ·Chap.·
S5· ·6, 7· If lh011jinnejt, 111ibat ddjl thn 11glli11jl bi#il ,,,. if
thy 'If'11A,'.{gre.ffeo111 be .,,./tiplitd, ·'llJbat doJ thrM 11~ W.1 If
thou ·be Y'ighteous, what gi'Vejt tkDll him, fJI' 'llJhat re&ei'Olth he
.j thine band ? /'

And as te his leaving us to the liberty of our own Choice,
. ebserve how . he is represented Dt1'1.· 30·. I 9· I clllJ JlltlVni
t111tl-Eorlh·this ilay-10 reeol'd againjl you, that J ba'Ve fat kfon
you. Life and Death, Blej/ing and Olrjing ; -theresore &blJofa
Life.

And as to his earnest Cencem for our Salvation, he•ordm
tke Prophet Ezelciel to deli-ver this Mdsage from him.:
Chap. 33. 11. SaytDllo them, .Aslli'Ur,faith theLordGoJ,
./' hfZ'Ue no pkafu re ;,, tbt dealb df the Witlutl, /J11t tb6I '"'
'IP'idctd ·turn fr°"' bis 'W'!)' a11il li'Ve. '1'11rn ye, ttml ye frMll
your e'Uil 'WfZJS; for w"I?; will ye die, O:Ho11fe.of israel? And
1lofa1H 1. ·s. HD'W ]hall I gi'Ve thee tip, Ephraim P llo!lJJ jhaO
if ileli'IJer 'thee, israel? .YD'llJ foal/ I make tb~uu A.dnah? HWJ
Jhal/.1 flt thee as Zeboim·? Mine bear.I is.lflnUJ !Within me,
:,,,. Repentings-are lriniJkd 'togetbtr.
:Every ·one _may fee ·how distant this \riew of God, and of
his .DealiDg"S ·with .:his ·creratures, is ·from ·the former; and
yet if we ·confider ·it -as a Scheme &.un'd to make us -conceive
:how ;graciousiy, mercisully, and justly God tieats us,
nocwithstancling 'the suprerne and abfelute -Dominion he ha
o~r . us, there will be. ·no "ineonsistency bettween :the two.
Y.eu fee 'here, ·that tho":the:Creatures be in his hand, .as Clllfl
in 'the Potter's, of ·which he may make V.eJfds of Ho1Ut1r:or
"'DijhonD«r, without any injury, ·or being accopergamumable; yet he ·uses that Power, with "1lthe pafiionate Love.and em.
can
cern that Parents iliew towards their Children : and theresore
we are to conceive of him as having all the tenderness
of AffeCtion, th:it. Parents feel in their Heart towards their
young ones; and that if he had been fo asseeted, he could
not ( considering our Circpergamumstanees) have gone fa,rther
than he has done to fa.ve us; that our Destruttion is as intirely
due to ours::lyes, as if. we were out of God's Power,
and absolutely in the hand of our own counsel.

§XX.VII. If we take these as Schemes design'd to give
us different Views of G~d, and his Transaetions with Men,
in order to oblige us to distinet Duties which we owe him,
and streteh, them. no sarther, they are very reconeileable:
And to go about to clalli the. one against the other, and argue,
as many do, tha:: if the one be true, the other cannot;
is full as absurd as to object against that Article of our Belief,
that Chrill: fits on the right hand of God, because Scripture
in other pbees, arid plain Reafon aisures us, that God·.hath
neither Hand nor Parts. . ·

And whilst a thing may in one respett be like another,
and in oth~ ref peCts be like the contrmissionary; and whilst we
know that thing only by resemblance, funilitude, or proportion;
we ought not to be furpriz'd, that the Reprc;sentations
are contrmissionary, and taken from things that seem irreconeilable,
or that the different Views of the fame thing 1hould give
occasion to different, nay contrmissionary Schemes.
§ XXVIII. We ought sarther to confider, that these are
not fo much design'd to give us Notions of God as he is
in himself,. as to make us sensible of our Duty to him, and
to oblige us to perform it. As for Example, when the
Scriptures represent God as an absolute Lord, that has his
Creatures intirely in his Power, and treats them according to
his pleasure; as one that is not oblig'd to confider their Advantage
at all, or any thing but &is own Will; that may
elefr one to eternal Salvation, and pass over another, or
c6ndemn him to eternal Mifery, without any other reason
but because he will do fo: When we read this, I fay, in the
holy Scriptures, we ought not to dispute whether God really
' .a.Cts thus or no, or how it will fuit with his other Attributes
<Jf 117i/dom and '1ujlice to d9 fo; but the use we ought to
1 · make
make of it, is to call to mind wha:t Duty and Submission
we ought to pay to one who may thus deal with us if he
please, and what Gratitude we ought to return him, for
elcaing and deereeing us to Salvation, when he lay under
no manner of Obligation to vouchsafe us that Fayour.
Again, when we find hi~ represented as a gracious and
mercisul Father, that treats us as Children, tha~ is sollicitous
for our welfare, that would not our Death or DeftruClion ;
that has done all things for our eternal Happinefs, which
could be done without violating the Laws of our Creation,
and putting a force upon our Natures; that has given us
Fret-Will, that we might be capable of Rewards at his
hands, and have the pleasure of choofmg for ourselyes ;
which only can make us happy, and like unto himself in
the most noble Operations of which a Being is capable: that
has given us alf the Invitations and Encouragements to
chopse well, that Mercy could prompt him to, or that the
J uftice which is due to himself and Creatures would allow ;,
and that never punishes us, but when the Necessity and
Support of his Government requires he should : When we
hear thcfe things, we are not fo much to inquire whether
this Representation exaaly suits. with what really pass'es iii
his Mirid, as how we ought to behave ourselyes in such a
Cafe towards him that has dealt fo graciousiy with us.

. § XXIX. And tho' th~ Representations be but Dcfaipttons
fitted to our Capacttles, tliro' God's great Condescension
towards us; yet it is certain, that there is as much
Mercy, Tcndcmc1S, and Juftic:e in the Conduct of God,
as- this Scheme represents : And on the other hand, that we
owe as much Fear, SubmilT10n, and Gratitude to him, as
if the first were the Method he took with us.
We make no fcrople to acknowledge, that Love and Hatred,
Mercy and Anger, with other Pafraons, are afcrib'd to
God; not that they arc in him, as we conceive them, but
to teach us how we arc to behave ourselyes toward him, and
what Treatment we may expect at his hands. And if fo,
why should we make any difficulty to think that For1-
lnowltdgt~ Purposes, Elt8ions, and Dt'1'ets are attributed to
him after the fa:neway, and to the f~e-inteµt?
Ii §~.

§ XXX. The second Ufe that I shall make of this Doll:
rine, is to. put you in mind, how cautious we ought to be
in ow- Reafonings and Deduetions coneerning things, of
w-hose nature we are not fully appriz'd. 'Tis true, that in
Matters we fully comprehend, all is clear and eaf y to us, and
we readily perceive the Cc.nnetl:ion and Confistency of all
the Parts : but it is not fo in things to which we are in a
great measure il:rangers,. and of which we have only an impersetl:
and panial view; for in these we are very apt to faney
Contraditl:ions, · and to think the accounts we receive of
them absurd. -

The truth of this is manisest from innpergamumerable Instanees :
as for example, from the Opinion.of·the .Antipodes: whilst
the matter was impersectly known, How many Objetl:ions
were made against it? How many thought they had prov'd
ro a DemonU:ration the lmpossibility· and Contradifuon of
the thing? And how far did they prevail with the generality
of the World to believe them? And yet how weak,
and in truth foolish, do all their Argpergamuments appear to Men
that know, and by· experience understand the matter?
· Others will fay the fame concesning the Motion of the
Earth, notwithstanding the great Confidenee with which
many have undertaken to demonstrate it to be impofIJble ;
the reason of which is only the impersell: Knowledge we
have of the thing: And as our understanding of it is more
• and more enlarg'd and dear'd, the Co~tr-aditl:ions vanish .
. · Ought w~- not theA to think all the Contradi&ons we
faney between the :Fore-knowl~dge of. Goo· and Contingeney
t>f Events, between Prectjlination and Free-will, to be the
Effctll:s of our -Ignorance and partial Knowledge ? May it
n~t be in this, as in the Matter of."the .Antipodes~ and Motion
of the· Earth ? ·May not the Ineonsistencies that we
find in the one, be as itl-grounded as those that have been
~rg'd. ag&:iilft the others? And-have we not reason tofufpeet,
nay believe· "this to: be the Cafe; fmce we are sure
that we know much less:of God ·and his Attributes, than
of-the Eatt:h and heavenly Motions?

· § XXXI. Even· in the Sciences that are most common
a,nd certain, there are some things, ·which amongst those
. : . ·. that
that are unacquainted with f uch' Matters, would pass for
ContradiCtions. As for example, let us suppose one ihould
happen to mention Negative §lttantitie.r among Perfons
strangers to the Mathematicks; and being ask'd wpat
is meant by those Words,-ihould answer, That he under:
stands by them !zyantities that are conceived to be !efs than
Nothing ; and that one of their Properties is that: being
multiplied by a Nutnber less than Nothing, the .t'rodutt
may be a Magnitude greater than any assign'd. This might
justly .appear a Riddle, and full of Contradictions, and
perhaps will do fo to a great part of my Auditors. Something
less than Nothmg, in appearance is a Contradiction;
a Npergamumber less than Nothing, has the fame face: That these
should be multipliable on one another, founds very oddly;
.and that the Product of less than Nothing upon less than
Nothing, should be positive,_ and greater than any assign'd
~antities, seems ineonceivable. And yet, if the most ~norant
will but have patience, and apply themselyes tor
· Inftruc9:ion to the skilful in these. Matters they will soon
find all the· seeming Contradictions vanish, and that the
. .Affertions are not only certain, but plain and eaf y Truths,
that may be conceiv'd without any.great difficulty.
Ought we not then to fuf pect our own Ignorance, when
we faney Contradictions in th~ Descriptions given us of the
Myfteries of our Faith and Religion ? and ought we not tC>
wait with Patience, till we come to· Heaven, the proper
School where ·these things are to be lell.rned ? And in the
mean time, aquiesce in that Light the holy Spirit ·has gi- .
ven _us in the Scriptures ; which, as I have shew'd, is sufficient
to dirett us in our present Circpergamumstanees.

§ XXXII. The third use I shall make of this Doctrine,
is to teach us what answer we are to give that Argpergamument
·that has puzzled Mankind, and done fo much mischies in
·in the World. It runs thus : '' If .God foresee or preddn"
nate that I 1hall be saved, I ~all infallibly be fo ; and if
·sc he foresee or have predefti.nated that I shall be damned,
" it is unavoidable. And theresore it is no matter what I
-~' do, or how I behave myself in this .Life." Many Aqfwen
have been ·given .to this, which I shall not at present
· l i 2. . examine :

examine : I 1hall only add, that if God's Fw1-lt111Wltdgt
were cxaaly conformable to ours, the consequenee would
seem jllft ; but inasmuch as they are of as different a nature
as any two Faculties of our Souls, it doth not follow
(because our foresight of Events, if we suppose it infallible,
must presuppose a Necessity in them) that theresore the divine
Prescience must require the fame Necessity in order to
its being certain. It is true, we call God's Fore-lt110fl1/edg1
and our own by the fame Name; but this is not from any
real likeness in the Nature of the Faculties, but from some
proportion observable in the EffeCts of them : Both having
this advantage, that they prevent any surprize on the Perfon
endow'd with them. ·

Now as it is true, that no Contingeney or Freedom in
the Creatures, can any way deceive or surprize God,
put him to a loss, or oblige him to alter his Measures :
So on the other hand it is likewise true, that the divine
Prescience doth not hinder Freedom ; and a thini may either
be or not be, notwithstanding that Fore.light of it
which we ascribe to God. When theresore it is ahedged,
that if God foresees I ihall be favcd, my Salvation is irisallible,
this doth not follow ; because the F.orc-knowledge of
God is not like Man's, which requires Neccffity in the Event,
in order to its being certain, but of another N atun:
consistent with Contingeney : And our inability to com;.
pi:ehcnd this arises from our ignorance of the tnle N aturc
of what we call Forc-knqwledge in God; And it is as impossible
we 1hould comprehend the Power thereof, or the
manner of its Operation, as that the Eye 1hould fee a
Sound, or the Ear hear Light and Colours. .

Only of this we are sure, that in this it differs from ours,
. that it may consist either with the being or. not being of
what is said to be foreseen or predestinated. Thus St. Paul
was a chosen V dfel, and he reckons himself in the npergamumber
of the prcdestinated, Ephtf. 1. 5. H1¥1Ji11g pride.fti1lated us 11
the adoption of Children by Jefus Cbrist to himsalf. And yet
he supposes it possible for him. to miss of Salvation : And
theresore he look'd on himself as obliged to_ufc Mortification,
and exe.rcife all ot-her Grace·s ,. in orde·r' to maCkaell ihnigs
Calling and Elealon sure ; left, as he teJls us, I Cor. 9. 2 7.
Y-hat 11.J "11J means when I have preach'J to others, I myjelf
fooulJ /11 a Caft-away, or a Reprobate, as the word is tranOated
in other places.

§ XXXIII. The fourth use I shall make of this Dotl:rine,
is to enable us to discover what Judgment we are to pass
on those that have ~anag'd this Controyersy: And for
mine own part I must prosess, that they seem to me to have
taken Shadows for Substanees, RefembJances for the Things
they represent; and by confoundin2 these have embroiled
themselyes and Readers in inextrica'"ble Difficulties.
Whoever will look into the Books writ on either fide,
will find this to be true: But because that is· a Ta1k too
difficult for the generality of Men, let them confider the
two Schemes of the Prtdestinarians and Free-Wiliers, in
the Bishop of Saruflls Exposition of the XVllth Article
of our Chureh ; where they will (as I think) find the
Opinions of both Parties· briefty, fully, and fairly represented,
and withal perceive this Error runs through both.
As for example, the great Foundation of the one Scheme
is, that God a.as for himself and his Glory, and theresore
he can only confider the Manisestation of his own Attributes
and PerseCtions in every Action ; and hence they
conclude that he must only damn or save Men, as his doing
of one or other may most promote his Glory.
But here it is manisest that they who reason thus --are of
opinion, that the desire of Glory doth really move the Will
of God; whereas Glory, and the Defire of it, are only ascribed
to God in an analogical Senfe, after the fame manner
as Hands and Feet, LOve and Hatred are: And when
God is said to do all things for his own Glory, it is not
meant that the Defire of Glory is the real End of his Actions,
but that he has ordered all things in such an excelient
Method, that if he had designed them for no other End,
they could not have fet it fcirth more essethtally. Now to
make this figurative Expression the Foundation of fo many
ha,r1h Conelusions, and the occasion of fo many Canten".'
dons and Divisions in the Chureh, seems to me the fame
kind of Mistake, that the Chureh of Rome commits in
taking the words of Scri~re, 'Ibis is tn} Bod], literally ~
Ii3 from
from whence fo many Absurdities and Contradictions ta
our Senfes and Reafon are inferred.

§ XXXIV .. Secondly, If you look diligently into these
Schemes, you will find a great part of the Difpute arises ·
on this ~testion, What is first oc second in the Mind of
God ? whether he first foresees and then ·determines, os
.first determipes, and by virtue of that foresees ? This
~eftion seems the more strange, because ·both Parties are
agreed, that there is neither first nor last in the Divine Understanding,
but all .is one single Aa in him, and continues
the fame from all Eternity. What then can be thC:
meaning of the Dif pute ? Sure it can be no more than this;
whether it be more honourable for God, that we should
conceive him as ~aing this way or that, fmce it is confef,.
fed that neither reaches what really passes in his Mind. So
'. that the ClEeftion is not coneerning rlle Operations of God
as they are in themselyes, but coneerning our way of ~Qnceiving
. them, whether it be more for his Honour to re~
present them according to the first or second Scheme : And
· certainly the right Method is to use both on occasion, · fO
far as they may help us to conceive honourably of the divine
Majesty ; and to deal ingenuoufiy with the World, and
tell them, that where these Schemes have not that esseal1
· or where through our stretehing them too far, they induce
us to entertain dishonourable Thoughts of him, or encoUsage
Difobedience, they are not applieable to him. In short;
that God is as absolute as the .first represents him, and Man
as free as the last would have him to be ; and that these·
different and seemingly contra.Qi&ry Schemes are brought
in to supply the Desects of one another.

§ XXXV. And theresore, 'lbirdiy, The Managers of
this Controyersy ought to have looked on these different
&hemes as chiesly design'd to inculcate some Duties to lis ;.
and to have press'd them no sarther than as they tended to
move and oblige us to perform those Duties. But they,·
on the contrmissionary, have streteh'd these Representations be_.
yond the Scripture's design~ and fet them up in ~positioQ
to one another ; and have endeayoured to pertuade the
:World that they are ineonsistent : infon;iuch_ that fo~e, to
· efta~
dlablilh Contingeney an.cl Free-Will, have deny'd God~s
Prescience; and others,. to fct up Predeili.nation, have
brought in a fatal necessity of all Events. .
, And not co~tent therewith, they have accused one another
of lmpiei:y, and Blafpherny, and mutually charg'd each
the other's Opinion with all the absurd Confeq~ces the.y
faney'd were deduc~b1e from it. . Thus the Maintainers o(.
Free-Will charge the Predestinarians as guilty of ascribing
Jnjustice, Tyranny, .and Cruelty to God, as making hirn
the Author of all t~e Sin and Mifery that is in the World :
And on the other hand, the A1ferters of Predestination have
accus'd the o1:hers, as destroying the Independeney and
Dominion of God, and subjeCting him to the Will and Hpergamumours
of his Creatures. And if either of the Schemes were
to be taken litera!ly and properly, the Maintainers of theJp
would find difficulty enough to rid themselyes of the Consequenees
charg'd on them: But if we take them only a,c;
analogical Representations, as I have.explained them, there
will be no ground or reason for these liif'erenees. .
§ XXXVI. And it were to pe. wish'd, that those who
make them would confider, that if they would prosecute
the fame Method in treating the other Representactons that
the Scriptures gi.v~ us of God's Attributes and Operations,
no less Absurdities woul~ follow: As for example, whes
God is said to be mercisul, loving, and pitiful, all-feei.ng,
jealous. patient, or angry; if these were taken literally, and
understood the fame way .as we fiQd them in U$, what absurd
and intolerable Consequenees _woplq follow.; and how
dishonourably must they be supposed to think of God, who
ascribe such Paffions to him ? Ye~ no body is shoek'd .. at
them, because they und~rstand them in an analogical Senfe~
And if they would but alsow Predestination, EleCl:ion, De·
crees, Purposes, and Fore-knowledge, to belong to God,
with the fame differenee, they would no more think.them-.
selyes obliged to charge those that ascribe them to him,
,with Blafphemy in the one Cafe, than in the other.
'Tis theresore incpergamumbent on us to forbear all such Deductions,
and we should endeayour to reconeile these several
Representations togeth~r, by teaching the People,
Ii 4 that
that God's Knowledge is of another Nature than ours; and
that tho' we cannot, in our way of th~, certainly foresee
what is free and contingent, yet God may do it by that
Power which answers t~ .Prescience in him, or rather in
truth, supplies the place of it. Nor is it any wonder that
we cannot conceive how this is done, fmce we have no di-_
rea: or proper Notion of God's Knowledge; nor can we
ever in this Life expeCt to comprehend it, any more than
. a Man who never {aw can expca: to discem the Shape and
Figure of Bodies at a distanee, whilst he continues blind.
§ XXXVII. 'The fisth use we arc to make of what has
been said, is to teach us how we arc to behave ourselyes
in a Chureh, where either of these Schemes is settled and
taught as a Doa:rine : and here I think the Resolution is
easy. We ought to be quiet, and not unseasonably disturb
the Peace of the Chureh ; much lcfS should we endeayour
to expose what she profcfi"es, by aliedging Absurdities
and Ineonsistencies in it. On the contrmissionary, we are
obliged to take pains to shew that the pretended Confe ..
quenees do not follow, as in truth they do not, and to
discourage all that make them, as Enemies of Peace, and
false Accusers of their Brethren, by charging them with
Consequenees they disown, and that have no other Fo\indation
but the Maker's Ignorance.

For in truth, as has been already lhewed, if such lnft:renees
be allowed, hardly any one Attribute or Operation
of God, as described in Scripture, will be free from the
Cavils of perverk: Men.

'Tis observable, that by the fame way of reasoning, and
by the fame fort of Argpergamuments, by which some endeayour
to destroy the divine Prescience, and render his Decrees
odious, Cotta long ago in Cicero attaeked the other Attributes,
and undertook to prove .that God can neither have
Reafon nor Understanding, Wifdom nor Prudenee, nor
any other Virtue. And if we understand these literally and
properly, fo as to signify the fame when apply'd to Godand
to men, it will not be eaf y to anf wer his Argpergamuments :
but if we conceive them to be ascribed to him by Proper·
tion and Analogy, that .is, if we meati no more when we . ~PY
aJ>ply them to God, than that he has some Powers -and
Faculties, tho~ not of the fame nature, which arcanal~
to these, an~ w~ch _yield him all the Ad~an~es
·wliich thcfe could give him if he had them, enabling him
to produce all the good EfFeas which we fee consequent
to them, when in the greatest Perseetion ; then the Argpergamuments
used by • Co1111 against them have no manner of
force : fmce we do not plead for such an U nderstanding,
Reafon, Juftice, and Virtue, as he objetl:s against, but for
more valuable Perfc:Clions that are more than equivalen~
and in truth infinitely superior to them, though calied by
the fame Names ; because we do not know what they are
in themselyes, but only fee their Efsects in the '\Vorld,
which are such as might be expetl:ed from the most conspergamummate
Rcafon, U ndCrstanding, and Virtue.

And after the fame manner, when perverse Men reason
against the Prescience, Predestination, and the Decrees of
God, by drawing the like ahsurd Consequenees, as Cott11
doth against the possibility of his being endowed with Reafon
and Underlbinding, &c. our Anfwer is the fame as
before mention'd. If these be supposed the very fame in
all respecb when attributed to GOd, as we find them in
ourselyes, there would be some colour from the Absurdities
that would follow, to deny ·that they belong to God; b\1t
when we only afaibe them to him by analogy, and mean
no more than that there are some things answerable to
them, from whence, as Principles, the divine Operations
proceed ; it is plain, that all such Argpergamuments not only lose·
their force, but are absolutely impertinent.
It

• Q.ualem autezn Demn intetligere nos polTpergamumus nulla virtute pr:rditam
l Qgid enim f ptudentiamne Deo tribuemus ? ~z constat ex scientia
rerpergamum bonanun & malarpergamum, &, nee bonaram nee malarpergamum l Cui
mali nihil ell, nee eft"e potest, quid huie opus ell deteaa bonorpergamum ~
maloram l ~id aatean ratione l quid intelligentia l quibas.u~imur ad eam
rem at apertJS obseara asseqaamur. At obscarpergamum Dco n1h1l potest efre. -
Nam Jallitia CJllZ foam cuiqae distribuit, quid ~tinet ad Deos l hominam
enim focaetas, & cemmanitas, ut vos diatis, J uftitiam procreavit :
temperan<ia autem constac ex prztermiuendia voluptatibas coiporis :
cui Ji locu1 in mlo ell, eft etiam volupwibas. Nam fortis Deus intelli.
gi 41ai ~test l in do!Ort, an in labore, an in pericalo 1 quorpergamum Deam
11ihd attingit. Nee ratione igitur 11tentem, nee virtate ulla przditaia
J>aam intelligere qui polspergamum111P Cit. de N11t. Deor. L. III. ~.15.

It is theresore f uffi.cient for the Ministers of the Chureh
to thew that the. established Dotl:rine is agreeable to Scripture,
and teach ~eir People w~at use ought to be ~m~e
of it, and to caunon them agamst the Abuse; which if
they do with Prudenee, they will avoid Contentions .and
Divisions, and prevent the Mifchiess which are apt to fol ..
low the mistaken Representations of it.

§ XXXVIII. This is the Method takeh bv our Chureh
jn her XVIIth Article, where we are taught, that Predef
tination lo Life is the everlashng Purpose of God, whereby ·
before the Foundations of the World were laid, be bath eon)
antly deereed by bis Counfel, Jecret to us, to deliver frostf
Curfe and Damnation those, 'lVhom he bath chosen in Chrift out
of Mankind, and to /Jring them by Chrijl to everlasting Sal'
lJation.-And that the godly Confideration of Predejlination~
and our Ele&lion in Chri.ft, is full of sweet, plea/ant, and unJpeakable
Comfort to godly Perfons,-as well because it doth
greatly ejlablish their Faith of eternal Salvation, to be enjoyed
through Chrijl, as because it doth servently kindle their Love
toward God.-'. And yet we must receive God's Promises, a.i
they be generally Jet forth to us in holy Scripture. Here you
fee the two Schemes join'd together: And we are allowed
all the Comfort that the Confideration of our being predestinated
can afford us : and at the fame time we are given
to understand that the Promises of God are generally conditional;
.and that not\_Vithstanding our belief of Predestination,
we can have no hope of obtaining the benefit of·
them, but by fulfilling the Conditions. And I hope I
have explained them in such a way, as shews them to be
consistent in themselyes, and of great use towards making
us ~oly here, an~ happy hereaster.

A
, SERMO.N
ON THE
FALL of MAN.
By his GRACE
WILL I AM Lord ArchbHhop of Du/Jlin.
THE THIRD EDITION,

On· the FALL Qf MAN ..

GEN. II. Ver. 16, 17.

A1ll1 tk Lord God eo"""""'1etl the Mlm, /"Jing., 0/ l'Ulf1
Cfree oft~ Gardt11 thou tllllJft fruly 1111. •
:&It of the f'ree of the how/edge of Good twl E'Vil lhtM
Jhalt not eat of it : For in the Dd) th4t th111 eatejl thereof,
thou shalt sure/y die. · .

A IL Y Experience 1hews us that there is much Ignorance,
~oily and Mifery amongst Men ; that we
a profpeCI: of these as soon as we begin to think ; and
that nothing more imbitters Life than that View. The
Beasts are sick, and want and die as well as Men ; but yet
are not fo miserable, because they fee no sarther than the -
present, and theresore are not tormented with the Remembranee
of what is past, or the sear of what is to come.
Whereas Men are apprized that Pains and Diseases, Difappointments
and Death are before them, and have not the
Jike certainty of one .Gn,Ve Aa of Pleasure to ballance the
difinal Confideration. Tllis should make us sensible that
we are not. in the State in which Nature placed us, fmce
a Good God can hardly be supposed to have made a Crea~
ture with lcfs Views of Happinefs than of Mifery. From
whence we may conclude that our present Estate is not that
wherein God created us, but that we are some way or other
falien from it. The TCJt gives us the occasion of that Fall,
and there is no other Account to be given of our present
Condition, but what we receive here from the Holy Saiptures
: for alth~ all considering Men have seen and bemoaned
our Mifery, rer. none could ever discover any other
rational ground for it, or give any tolerable Reafon how it
came to be fo.

It is surely of great moment to us to be acquainted with
it, because it is one Step to the Cure to discover the Dif'ease.
It is a ~ubjc:d: 119~ co~only handled, and reAquires
nen.
-
Attention in T ob, as •ll as D.lli~nc:e and Care in Me to
inform you in the following Particulars.
. 1ft. Of the State of Circpergamum~ces of Man, when this
Command in the Text w~Jf;en.
2dly. The Command · furbidding Adam to eat of
the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and ·Evjl. -
3dly. How Man was feduecd t:o break tlm Command.
4thly. The Confcquenees of this Difobedience. .. ... . . :; . \.
· As to the State and Circpergamumstanees of Man when this
Command was given.

1ft. It is manisest, that he was then immediately created,
and being just come out of the hands of God, he was in a
,state proper to ·his·Nature, pure and innocent, without any
Stain or Corruption. Ht had no Law but that of
his Mind, or what he recdvcd by immediate Revelation
from God ; nor any defeCt, but that which is unavoidably
incident to every thing created, which may be· persect in
its kind, but cannot be absolutely fo ; that being proper to
God. For to fay :;r thin~ was created is to confcfs that it
depends on the Will ano Power of him tha( made it ~ and
theresore it cannot be self.:.sufficient; but needs the continual
support of its Creator, and the afristanee of such of its fel-
1MV Creatures as ~od has been ~leased to ap~irtt as needFmissionary
helpers for rts subststence. All the Persection theresore
to which Creatures can pret~d, is to anf wer the deftgn
for which they -were created. This i~ that Goodnefs
God faw in them, This undoutedly Man had, and in this
fcnfe he was 'Dery good. If theresore God did not design
that Man should be self-sufficient, but have a Communion
with the bOdies that are about him, and as a portion of the
U nivcrfe depend on their Affistanee and' Influence as to his
Material part ; it will be no Impersection in him that he
owes his Food ta the Eanh, .his Warmth-to the Sun, and
his Breath to the Air .. For fmce God has made all these
necefi'missionary to his Subfistanee, he anf wers the design of Providenee,
whilst he uses them to the purposes, to which God
has appointed them, .

· 2dly. We·must remember that if Mm's Understanding
at first was never fo clear, and his senses and faculties never
fo
- ,
fo strong ;· yet having made no Observations, and being
absolutely without Experience, he could know no more of
any thing,. than what was revealed by God to him. And
there was no necessity that God should reveal more Knawledge
to him than was at present to be used by him. You
may observe in the 19th Verse of this Chapter, that out of
the Gr0und the Lord God form' d every Bea.ft of the Field, and
t'Uery Fowl of the Air, and brought them to Adam, to fee
what 'he would call them, and wh~tfaever Adam calied every
li'lling creature, that was the name thereof. This was the
way by which God taught him Language ; and you fee it
went no sarther than the Names of the Beasts of the l!.arth,
and Fowls of the Air amongit whom he lived, and over
whom he was to exereise Dominion.
Nor was it any Impersetti.on in the .6.dl: Man, that he
was ignorant . of the Nature of things, if we suppose that
he had· a certain way to come t-0 that Knowledge, when he
had occasion for· it." For the design ·of Knowledge is not to
amuse us or fill our heads with Notions, but to serve and
direa:· us 'in. the Affairs of Life. It is only this fort of
Knowledge that is tmly valilable : Apd he that has most
of 'it and heft· applies it, is to be accounted most wife. If
theresore Adam had a certain way of knowing the nature
of every Thing, when he was to employ that Knowledge ;
-though he was aetually without it, yet 'lie· was in a better
State than any of liis Pofterity, who have made many Observations
and are furnished with inany aetual Notions, but
have no certain way of coming to such Knowledge as upon
every Occafiori is necessmissionary for their Diretti.on. ,
- 3dly. Theresore we muil: conceive that Adam was under
the immediate c'onduet and· direetion of God, and was not
to judge for himself, but was to· leave himself entirely to be
guided and directed by his Maker. You fee he was not
left fo determine for himself what 'he Jhauld eat : But God
by Revelation affigried him his Food anq provided it for
him. So Chap. 1. v. ~9· Altd God [aid, Behold I ha'lJe gi"
Jen you every herb bearing feed which is upon the face of all
the Earth:. And t'l.1ery erree "in which is the fr_uit of a erree
yielding feed, to iou it shall be for Mlat.. And in the Text,
·. I of.

of WlfJ 'J"ree in the GtJrtlm thou mayjl freely 141. This (eems
added, because these Trees of Paradise were not planted
when God made the Revelation of the first Chapter : And
theresore it might be doubted whether they were intended
for the Food of Man, or given him by the sonner Revelation,
if God had not exprdly declared it.
Now if a Man was not to feed himself before he had
God's Direenon for it, which favcd him the trouble and
hazard of finding out by Trials what was fit for him ;
lt is reasonable to believe that in every Affair of Life he
was to depend on the fame Direaion ; that he was not
to afi"pergamume to himself that Knowledge of Good and Evil,
that is; of what was prositable or hurtsul to him, but entirely
to depend on God for the Determination thereof; and
whilst he did fo, he could 'never know Evil, because God
would always direa him to what was Good, and to that
only.

It is to be constdered that Man by his Conftitution was
Mortal, and subjeCl: to the Impressions of the Bodies that
surrounded him ; for being composed of the Elements as
to his material Part, in which lie resembled other living
Creatures, those might be separated and difi'olvcd, and the
~tion of the Pans of_ our Body infers Death. And
theresore Man in his natural Composition was subje~ to it;
but yet was capable of Immortality, to which· he could not
be intitled but from a supematural Principle\ and the peailiar
Care of God. For it was impossible that Man's Understanding
how great soever, Jhould be fo perseCl: as to enable
him Of hirnfClf to know and avoid all those things that
might occas10n a Decay and Difsolution of his Body. Only
God's Knowledae could reach this ; and theresore it is manisest
he must acpc:nd on that ; and on all occJfions have
recourse to it, if 1ie cxpcaed to continue Immortal.
Nor 4thly, Was hiS being obliged to such dcpendanee
to be looked on as a Desea; but rather a most signal Fayour.
I observed before, that he depended on the Air for
Breath, on the Sun for Warmth, and on the Earth. for
Food;. And yet none of thcfe could be reckon'd an ImperseCtion
; How much 1e1S cou1cl his J?cpendanee on his
Creator
Creator for the inlightning and informing his U nderstanding
for the Difcovery of what was Good and Evil, either
in his Moral or Natural Actions, be look'd upon as derogatory
to his Nature. On the contrmissionary nothing could be ~
greater Honour to him, than that God should vouchsafe
to become his Guide ; nothing could be a greater Security
or Advantage. This must and only could take away all
Doubt and Solicitousnefs out of his Mind and render him
persealy easy and secure. By thi!t he had the Benefit of
all Knowledge, and was freed from the trouble of aequir-.
ing it.

It is true 'that we have now an unmeas urable Thirft of
improving our U nderstanding and penetrating into the Nature
of Things, we reckon a great part of our Happinefi
to consist in it, and value ourselyes on it ; but we are not to
imagine that it was fo from the beginning. The reason of
our Eagemess for Knowledge now arises from our depending
on our own Conduce. Hence on all occasions we find
great Ufc for it, and having nothing elfe to trust to, that
can lead us through the Difficulties of Life, we endeayour
to know as much as we can, and are glad when we can
attain to any new Notion; because we find ourselyes osten
at a loss and cannot tell how soon it may be usesul to Us.
But whilst Man was not to judge . for himself, whilst he
depended on the Omnifeiency of God to direa him, he had
no fileh occasion for knowing the Nature of Things, nor
need be much coneerned about them. For to .what purpose
1hould .Adam have desired to aequir:e Knowledge,
when he could have recourse to the infinite Wifdom of God
on all occasions to inform and guide him ? Whilft Children
are supply'd by. their Parents, can call for any thin~ they
want, they are little cOV'etous of Money, and can nardly
be prevailed with to apply their Heads to the Methods of
aequiring it ; nor are they fond of it when they have it :
But a Stock being once put into their Hands, arid they
. finding that they must want, if they do not provide and
manage industriousiy, They do by degrees grow thirsty of
Gain and parsimonious; lay projects and eagerly pursue
the means of enriching themselves. Wa may conceive it
· Kk was
was thus with Man in his lnnocency ; and that he was little
solicitous about aequiring Knowledge, whilst he could
recur to the inexhaustible Stock of God his Parent, and be
supply'd by a free Communieation from thence on all Oci:
afions. But when by Sin he cut hirriself off from that,
and became his own Mafter to judge what was good. and
evil for himself, he then found himself under continual
doub~ and Difficulties ; be is become sensible of his Ignorance
and Difability how to determine in the Affairs of Life,
and has no other Affistanee than his own Understaneling:
This makes him diligent to improve it, and as covetous (i
.Knewledge as of Money ; and fo searelies for the treasure
of the one with as ivuch Industry and Pains as of the other.
V/hereas whilst he depended on God only for his
DirecHon, he was freed from all that Labour, Thirft and
Anxiety wherewith he now prosecutes Knowledge, and wu
content with i:he inexhaustible Treasure of Divine Wifdom,
to which he had an easy and ready Access on all Occafions:
and till we have the like again we can never be happy or
secure. God is the Father. of Spirits, and as a Father he is
ready to make Provision for them, if they will have reco¢e
to him and depend on him. He is the Light of Souls,' and
has d1e fame proportion to them, that the Sun and his
Beams have to the Eye. Whilft we have the use of these,
we know our way and can fee about us ; But when these
are absent, we are forced to use artilicial Lights that can
never persectly supply the want of dJ.em. All our aequired
Knowledge is but like these artificial Lights that can never
supply the Communieation of Wisilom, which God was
pleated to impart to our first Parents in that .State of Innocency,
and of which he deprived them for their Sin. This
I suppose inay be sufficient to teach us the Condition and
Circpergamumstanees of Man when that Command in the Text
w~ given him. · .

As to. the Command itself, which was the· 2d Head of
my Discourse, But of the CJ'ree of the Knowledge of Goad anti
Evil, tho.u shalt not eat of it, for in the Day that t~ eatejl
~hereof thou }halt surily_ die ; We arc to confider, I.ft, the
Tree here mentioned. ·
1dly

- - 2dly. The Congruity of God's applying it to the present
use, and · ..
3dly. The Reafonablen~iS of God's making it an In-
·stanee of our Obedience. _
. Coneerning the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil
here mentioned, Let us observe I ft. that it was a true literal
Tree, and that we are not to be put off with a meer
Figure. For it is said, v. 9. of the Chapter. And out of
the Ground made the Lord God to gru·w every 'free that is
plea/ant to the Sight, and good for food, the 'I'ree of Life al.fa
in the midjl of the Garden, and the '.tree of Knowledge of Good
an4 Evil. If the Trees for sight and food were true literal
Trees, then fo likewise were the Trees of Life and Knowledge,
for both are equally said to grow out of the
Ground. And when God ·in the Text allows Man to eat
of the other Trees, he forbids him on pain of Death to eat
of the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil. Now
to understand eating and '.Trees literally in one part of the
Text, and figurati;vely in the other, when there is no intimation
or ground for a different Senfe, is ineongruous to
reason. No! it will be plain to any one that confiders
the design of Moses, that he is giving us here the literal
History of the Creation of the World, of the .Making and
Fall of Man, and not an Allegory. But because this does
not fuit with the Notions of some Men, to whom the Scripture
in the literal Senfe seems not sufficiently f piritual,
theresore they endeayour to allegorize the History of Man's
Fall, but might with equal reason ntrn his Creation and
that of the World into a Figure. And it is observable
# that the fame Perfons that put a figurative Senfe on· the
Tree of Knowledge of good and evil, and on the manner
of Man's becoming liable to· Death, as the Scriptures deliver
it; do the fame with the Methods God has appointed
for our Recovery, and deny not only the literal Sacraments,
but likewise the Reforrection of the fame Body, the Power
of the literal Death of Chrift and the Satisfaction purehased
by it. But we must not separate the literal from
tjle mystical Senfe ; as we must not deny the Baptifm of
Water, because we acknowledge that of the Spirit, nor
the RefurreCl:ion of our Bodies because we own another of
· Kk.2 our
our Souls ; (o neither must we deny a literal Tree of
Knowledge because it had a mystical Senfe and lmp<>r- :
tance.

And this brings me to the second thing coneerning this
Tree, the congruity of God's applying it to the use mentioned
in the Text: For the Understanding of which we
must remember that God in all his Intercourses with Men
has constantly made use of some visible or outward Means ;
and that it is reasonable it fuould be fo. For fmce Man
has a Body as well as a Soul ; Senf es as well as Understanding
; and that the Soul does make use of the Organs
of the Body and of the Senfes for its inform~tion ; and
that this is the natural ·course of our aequiring Knowledge ;
it were a violenee to the Nature of Man to invert the
Method, or separate the one from the other. And theresore
God in his Communieations with us seems industriously
to have avoided it; especially where the joyning them
together may contribute to the certainty and estectualnefs
of the Revelation, and to secure us from being imposed
on by pretenders. Whenever theresore God has Ihewed
any Miracte, he has made use of some outward Action to
prepare the Minds of Men for it, and aseertain them of
his presenee. Thus Moses did all his Miractes with his
Rod, Thus Elijho ordered N 1ZtJmo11 to wafu seven times in
the river Jordan to cure his Leprosie. And although God·
industriousiy avoided asspergamuming any fuape, when he gave
the Law; yet he assured the People of Ifrael that he was
present by Thunder, Smoke and Fire at Mount Sinai, and
by a burning Bulh at his first appearance to Moses. Nor
did our Saviour go about the public execution of his Office,
'till anointed by the Spirit, and visibly commissioned to it
by the Holy Ghojl deseending on him in a bodily fuape :
And thus he still communieates to us the Principles of our
new Birth by Water, and his Body and Blood by Bread
and Wine. Now this being the manner of God's entertaining
an lntercourse with Man through the whole Scripture,
it is very evident that the two remarkable Trees of
Paradise, that of Life, and this of the Knowledge of Good
and Evil, were designed for these mystical purposes, and
intended as settlec! and visible means to supply Man with
God1s
·God's Influence and Affistanee in those cases in which he
could want them.

For 1ft. Man might be at a loss how to preserve his
Body from Decays, to which (as was observed before) it
was naturally subjeCt. And 2dly, how to direa: his Ac- ·
tions.. For the first of these God appointed the Tree of
Life. Not that any Tree by any natural Vinue could preserve
us immonal : but since God commanded Man to eat
of it as osten as he needed to be reftor'd in his Body, he
surely was ready and able to convey his supernatural Mftstanee
to him by it, and make it esseetual to the design
for which it was appointed. Man's eating theresore of it
with Faith and in Obedience to God, was the Signal upon
which the Divine Power was pleas'd to exen itself for the
Reftauration of him to his primitive Vigour. ·And there
is no more difficulty to conceive how this should be done,
than how the israelites in the Wildernefs should be . cured
of the Bitings of the venomous Creatures by looking on
the brazen Serpent. Every faithsul Christian expefu God
fuould anf wer his Prayers, and grant him fom~ things,
which he could not . have without asking ; and if God exert
his Power on our speaking a word, or offering a desire,
which have no natural Virtue to procure the Efsea: ; he
may do the Umie upon our giving a Signal by some Action
appointed by him to that purpose. If he gives his Holy
Spirit to them that ask it according to his Promise, why
not to those likewifo who in Obedience to his Command
are baptized in his Name? And if he give Life and Immonality
.now to those that believe and are baptised, why
might he. not give and preserve Life by means of that
Tree, to the use of which.he had promised it, when they
in Faith should eat of it? Now that Life was annexed to
th~ use of that Tree is plain from Chap. 3. ver. 22. And
now left he put forth his hand, and take also of the CJ'ree of
Life, and eat and live for ever ; theresore the Lord God Jent
him forth fr.om the Garden of Eden. This shews that the
restoring of Strength and preservation ·of Life was annexed
to that Tree by an irr.evocable Decree : for the Words.
plai'nly intimate that if Man after his fall, could have con·
tinued the use of it, he had been Immortal.
Kk 3 And
And as God provided for the preservation of his Body
by the tree of Life, fo he likewise provided for his ~
and taught him how to govern it by the tree of the knowledge
of Good and Evil : and this he was not to eat, nor
to touch it. By which was signisied unto him that he was
not to pretend or any way to judge what was good or evil
for him : but on all occasions to have recourse to God, and
entirely to resign and trufi: himself to the Divine Conduct.
That as it was by the Declaration of God certain Death to
eat of this Tree on account of its being a Symbol of the
immediate dependanee on his Maker, for the distinguishing
of what was good or evil for him ; fo he was n<?t to
trust to his own U nderstanding for the determining of these ;
but to have recourse to God without further coneerning
himself about them.

And this sufficiently suews how congruous it was for God
to make use of this Tree for this purpose, and is a Step to
discover to us the reasonablene& of God's making Man's
abstinenee from it an instanee of Obedience ; which was
~ the 3d thing to be suewed coneerning it.
For the understanding of which, you must observe, rft.
That the whole Duty of Man lay in obedience to this Com•
· . mand, as the whole means of Immortality was in eating of
the Tree of Life. .Whilft man refrain'd from eating of
this Tree, he could have no other Temptation, he could
neither feel nor know any EviJ, for he was ·under the intmediate
care and proteCtion of God ; and those were sufficient
to preserve him from all hurt or mischies; which his
own Understanding could "1lever do. Man's whole Duty
theresore and safety were comprehended in this one Command
: and as the use of the Tree of Life was an infallible
and the only means of preserving his Body, fo the
eating of this, and thereby violating the Divine Command,
was the only way to hurt his Soul. Thi:; was the only
Door by which Evil could come in upon him, and if he
had kept that fuut, it could never have entered.
2dly. We must confider that Man was fallible in his Understanding,
peccable in his Will, and mortal in his Body
; and theresore the preserving him from Deceit,. Sin and
Death must be due to some supernatural Grace of God;
3 and
and that in order to confer that Grace there ought to be
some obvious means, eaf y to be known and ready to be
used. And ,perhaps ~twill be hard-to think of any other
way fo suitable as this which God chose. For if fame out•
ward means ought to be used, this restraining him from the
use of one of th:e Trees seems the most proper : some such
Symbol seems not only reasonable but nece1fmissionary ; and food
being the only thing he needed, and that provided for him
out of the fruits of the Earth, the lnstanee could not be fo
proper in any other matter.

3dly. We must remember that Man was created a free
Agent, and it is the Nature of fach to be pleas'd with nothing
that is not agreeable to their choice. The best and
most pleasmg thing in the World. if it be forced on us
against our choice, is uneasy to us. There must be something
of choice in what makes us happy; and could there
be a more easy thing to be left to that, than not to eat of
one Tree where there were fo many? We may imagine
~hat God in essect said to Man, Your Nature requires that
you should choose those things the enjoyment whereof will
make you happy. I will make your Duty easy unto you ;
abstain from this one Tree,, and whilst you do fo, I will take
care that you shall not choose amiss in any thingelse. Your
obedience in this shall be an infallible means. to secure you
from choof mg wrong in any other thing. Whilft you use
your Free-Will right in this, I will take care that you shall
not abuse it on any other occasion. Some Instanee cf your
free Obedience is nece1fmissionary: And this is the most easy that
could be provided for you. But by your wrong use of FreeWill
here, you will open a Gate for Sin and Death to enter.
Surely this account makes this Command very reasonable,
very agreeable for God to give, and Man to receive. And
from this it appears that it was not given meerly as an arbi~
trmissionary tryal of submission to tfle Will of God ; ' but rather as
a means to facilitate and secure the Obedience we owe him.
W~en Chrijl sent the blind Man to ·the Waters of Siloam
for opening his Eyes, no-body will fay that that Command
was a meer" tryal· of. his Obedience ; but rather a means to
restore his Sight. · And fo when God commanded Man
here not to eae of the 'Iree of Kllowledge, &c; . That Abfti-:. ·
K k 4 nenee
ncncc was not imposed upon him fo much by the way or
tryal, as to be a means to assure him of the Grace and Mftstanee
of God. This gave him an lnterect in his .own
HappinefS, because it made it in some measure depend on
his Free-Will, without which it could not have been Happine15,
as has been 1hew'd before ; and yet it made it fo easy
to him, that nothing but the Goodnefs of God could have
found out fo very feilfible and fo essectual a means. Thus
you fee a fair meaning and reason of this Command, and
chat there is no necessity of forsaking the Letter of Scripture
to justify God's impofmg it.

Let us now in the 3d place confider by what means Man
was seduced to break this Command. Of this we have an
Account, Ch. 3. When God aiks the ~eftion of the Woman,
1he answers, v. 13. 'Ibe Serpent beguiled me f'1lll I Jill
eat. Now it will be necessmissionary, 1 ft, to confider the Seducer,
and 2dly, the Argpergamument by which he prevailed on
her. As to the Seducer, 'twas a Serpent, Ch. 3. v. 1. NfJW
the Serpmt WllS tlllJt'e fa/Jtle than 1111} Bea.ft of the J.leld, wbitb
1be Lord God bad made ; 11nd be said unto the W flf/llJll, ye1,
blltb God f11id ye jhllll not eat of e'Otry 'Iree of I.be Garden!
From which you are to observe, 1 ft, that this was a literal
Serpent ; die fame Serpent that is now curs'd, and goes on
his Belly, -.nd eats Duft; that is hated and abhoiTed by
Man, that is fo poisonous and pernicious to him, between
whom and Man there is a natural Enmity to this Day, is
literally meant in this place, and is not to be allegOrifed
•way, a,s some would have it. .

2dly. The; Serpent was then the most subtle and cun-
1ling of Bcasts, we must not understand this of him, as
now ftllpify'd by the Curfe of God, but as created at first
i.n perseetion. The tradition of whose cunning was fo constailt
aiid universitl that it became proverbial among all the
Antien~, with whom to be wife as Serpents (meaning the
first of the kind) denotes the persession of Subtlety; which
Diews a general belief that he had at .first a Sagacity more
dlan ordinmissionary.
3dly. We are not to wonder that E'lle was not furpriz'd
or frighten'd at the Serpent's speaking to her; for as I of>.
jg-y'cfbefore, 1he hiLd yet no experienc;:e of things, was ig~
· · norance
norant of the nature of Beasts, and for ought 1he knew;
all of them might speak. as well as Adam did. This Ignorance
could be no hun to her, for if 1he had defir'd to
know, 1he had no more to do but to apply herself to God,
who was her immediate Director, and would have discover'd
it to her, if 1he had ask'd it; and we are.not to doubt but
it was as easy for her to have had recourse to him, as it is
for us to open our Eyes in order to fee; and theresore 1he
was as inexcusable as a Man would be that 1hould fall into a
Pit because he would not look before him.
But 4thly. Tho' this was a true literal Serpent, yet there
was more in it, the Devil made use of it to compass his
Ends : And he was the Perfon that spake through it. This,
as I take it, is confess'd by all ~ for no Brute could ever reason
· or speak of itself: And it ought to be observ'd that
when the worship of the Devil was settled in the World, a
Serpent was the Sign and Symool of whatever was sacred
to him ; he was worshipped under that form, and seem'd to
take a peculiar Pleasure to appear and receive homage in
that Shape in which he deceived Man. Add to this, that
a Serpent was the Beast by which he vented his Oractes in
many Places, and the very Word by which his Divinations
are signisied in several Languages is taken from this Animal
; as if the Devil were frill aaing hi$ Deceits in the
Serpent. ·

. As to the Argpergamument that he used to seduce our first. Parents,
we shall find it a very plauftble one. 'Tis in Chap. 3.
v. 4. And the Serpent said unto the Woman, Te shall not suret,
die ; for God doth lenow, that in the Day ye eat thereof, then
your Eyes shall /Je opened, and ye shall /Je as Gods ll1W'Wing Good
and Evil. The Meaning of this seems to be as if he had .
said, God doth but mock you, when he threatens you with
Death; this is not the reason why he forbids you the Ufe of
this Tree : the true design is to keep you in Ignorance, to
blindsold you, and hinder you from judging for yourselyes
by your own Eyes and Reafon. By this means you are
kept altogether in a dependanee on him, and obliged in all
,::ases to have recourse to him, and not suffer'd to enquire
by the strength of your own Faculties, what may hurt or
help you._ "You have Qot the use of the Senf es and Under-
. standin3
standing you ~fi'cfS by Nature, but are keptin a blind unaufonable
subjeB:ion to his Will. But he J.Cnows if you cat
of this Tree, you shall be freed from this pupiJage of Slavery.
That you will of your(elyes, as wCll as he, understand
what is good or evil .for you, and fo need not be
beholden to him : He judges what is good for himself, and
that Privilege makes him God : and theresore you may be
sure it is a pleasant thing to do fo. And for this reason he
keeps it to himself, and will not allow it you. But if you
will venture and eat, you will then be like him, and be
competent Judges of your own Advantage, as well as he is.
Thus our first Parent was prevail'd .on to fufpetl: God, and
make a tryal by Difobedience whether her nwn Eyes and
Understanding miWt,t not be sufficient to direct: her. ·Nor
is ·it any wonder she was deceiv'd, if we confider her ·want
of Experience and innocent Simplicity. Not that 1he was
excufable, fmce 1he had no more to take care of but this one
thing, and 1he ought to have had rcci>urfe to God or her
Hufband before 1he made the experishent. But the Argpergamument
was fo framed as to prevent that recourse, and theresore
it .only was capable to deceive her; The Serpent suggested
to her, that God imposed on her, and theresore it
seemed improper to consult with him, when 1he defJ.red to
discover whether it was fo or no. This is· fo powersul a
Method of deceiving that it is observable it seldom fails to
be essethlal, and that an Argpergamument almost like this corrupts
the generality of Mankind. Either ill Company or Olli
own Heads suggest to us, when we are Children and ignorant
of our Interect, that our Parents Guardians and Tutors
debar ·US of the pleasures of Life, out of envy. W c argue
with ourselyes and one another, that these old Fellows keep
us to our Books and to oµr Work,. debar us of our pleasures
and recreations, bring us under Rules, and admoni1h us to be
aware of Luft, and Excefi'es, that they may engross those
to, themselyes and keep us in a dependanee on them ; that
theresore they will not suffer us to try these Enjoyments,
and. that the deftgn of all· is to make us slaves. Whereas we
are apt to think, that we have: U nderstanding enough to
manage ourselyes, and theresore why may we not be left to
be our own guides and to choose for ourselyes.? Hence we .
coneon~
ude, let us make the Experishent and throw off the
Refuaints our condutl:ors would put on us. And dms
thousands have been and daily are deceived. And few
young People are able to resist the force of this Temptation
; which 1hews the power of it : especially when it comes
as it did on E'Oe, "doathed with all outward advantage of
Allurement, as in the . 6th v. 'Ihe 'Ir'l was good f fll'fltlil,
pleasant to the Eyer, and a 'Iree to /Je dejb'd to malteo11efllifo.
So wife that they needed no more to confuft God to teach
them what was Good or Evil for them. Thefe were Charms
she could not eastly resist; by these 1he was then feduc'd,
and deceived her Hufband, and by the like Temptations her
Pofterity daily fall. Whoever knows the hpergamumour of_ Y OUtb,
and how.. it was with himself when Young, doth also know
that this Curiofity of trying the pleasures of Senfe, this Itch
of being our own Mafters and choofmg for oursdyes, together
with the charming face of Sins, and our ignorance and
inexperience of the consequenees of them, are generally
the first means of our being ·corrupted, against the good
Maxims and Principles we receive from our Parents and
Teachers : As the faimesS of the Fruit, the seeming propernefs
of it for _food, and the defn:e of be~ng judge £or
herself of what might be good and evil, of being under bet
own Management and Government, were the Inducements
that prevailed with ~ur first Parent to throw off the condua
of God.

·There remains now the 4th and last part of'what I piopofc:
d, th~ consequenees of this Difobed!ence. They are
fo dismal and npergamumerous,. that I can only hint at fomc Of the
principal of them. The first of them was the opening thei
Sinners Eyes, Ch. 3. 7. And the Eyes of them /JotfJ ,,,,,.,
opnud. A Mari's Eyes are said to be opened when he per-"
ceiVC$ or discovers something rela~n~ to his State and Condition
which he did not observe Detore. Now before this
Tranfgreffion Man had not discovered any want or desea
in himsdf: He was diretl:ed by the Wifdom of God, and
supply'd by his All-sufficiency, and theresore wanted nothing
for his Condua: and Supporc. But when he put himself out
of the Divine Protea:ion, and was to manage and support
bimte1f; he soon faw and felt his imperseaions and Wants.
Whilft
-
Whilft young Children are under their Parents Government
and Care ; they are solicitous abo\lt nothing ; They
are not coneern'd about their Meat, Drink or Safety, any
sarther than to call to their Parents for them when they want
ihem : nor are they afraid while they are near them: but if
they .should withdraw themselyes, and leave their Children
in the dark, or in a Wildernefs, their Eyes would soon be
open'd; they would soon fee and feel their Impotence to
help and defend themselyes; Coneern and Terror would
seize them, and take away the use of the little Reafon they
have. We may imagine this to be the Condition of our first
Parents, when God withdrew his Influence and Proteaion
from them upon their deserting him. Their Eyes were
opened as soon as they were left to themselyes. Thev foµnd
their Necessities and Wants. They found the 1horthess oftheir
own Power to help them, and insufficiency of their
own U nderstanding to direB: them. They found themselyes
incompetent Judges of what was good or evil for them, and
they then in earnest, to their cost, lenew Evil, that is, felt
it. This was a natural Consequenee of their setting up to
be their own Maft.ers, and to judge for themselyes : no
finite U nderstanding being sufficient to foresee or know
what in the infinite variety of our Circpergamumstanees may hurt
us ; and tho' it did foresee them, yet nothing less than an
Almighty Power is able to prevent the Mifchies. The
opening theresore of our first Parents Eyes to fee their impendent
Miseries, and their Impotency to help themselyes,
was the first essect of their Sin.

The 2d was their sense of their being naked, and 1hame
that they were fo. Shame proceeds from a Consciousuefs of
W eak.nefs, o.r of Guilt, and from a seeret Pride that makes
us unwilling to own it, left we should be def pised for. it.
Man could not be conscious of either before his Fall, because
he was innocent from Guilt, and was covered by the Power
~f God against all the desects of his natural W eaknefs ;
but being now left to himself, he felt both. He had offended
God, and had no defence against his fellow-Crea~
ures: the Sun fcoreh'd him, the Rain wet him, and the
Cold pierc'd him. He found an Ineonveniency in· e~fmg
)Us Body, and was alham'd of the Efsects of it. He found
himself
himself mov'd with Luft and other irregular Paffions, and:
his Reafon unable tQ curb them. Whereas the Power of
God, whilst he was under the Divine Government, had kept.
all his Faculties in persett order. He Jaw theresore now.
great hurt in N akednefs, which no way incommoded. him:
whilst cover'd in Innocency.

The 3d Effeet of this Tranfgreffion of our first Parents
was Aversion to God. Ch. 3. v. 8. And Adam and bis Wife
bid themselyes from the Prefence of the Lord God amongst the
CJ'rees of the Garden: ver. 10. I was afraid, because I was
naleetl, and I hid myself. This was a very natural Effeet ; for .
fmce they were concem'd to fee their Nakednefs, fmce they
were alham'd of it, and it now difpleas'd their Eyes, they
could not think it could be pleasmg to God. There was a visible
Prefence of God in Eden, and Man no doubt was taught
to (Orne· before him with Decency and Reverenee : And
being now blotted and stain'd with Sin in his Soul, and.
naked in his Body, he must needs be afraid to appear in
such Circpergamumstanees before his Maker. When he was asham'd
to fee himself, he might well be afraid to be seen of God.
A Child that has dirty'd and hurt himself in disobeying his.
Parent's Command, will naturally·fiy his Prefence. Thus·
it far'd with Man in Paradise, and thus it continues with us
his Pofterity to this Day. We are afraid of that Commerce,
and flee that Communion with God that was the great Com-·
fort and Security of Man in his Innocency.

The 4th Consequenee of Man's Tranfgreffion was God's
pronouncing Sentence on each of the Tranfgrefi'ors ; on the
Serpent, on the Woman, and lastly on Adam.

, Firft on the Serpent, And the Lord God /aid unto the Ser-.
pent, CJ'bo" art turfed above all Cattle, and above every Beast
of the Field ; upon Jby Belly shalt thou go, and Duft shalt
Jhou eat all the Days of tby Life ; and I will put Enmity bstween
thee and the Woman, between thy Seed and her. Seed, it
foal/ bruise thy Head, and thou shalt bruise bis Heel. To be
cµrfed is to become abominable and miserable ; to be designed
and deyoted to Deftma:.ion ; to be under the. Dif- .
pleasure of God and the Execration .of Men. The Serpent
c;arries still the Marks of this Curfe, and is forced to,
cover and hide its Head on all occasions, as being offensive;
to
10 the ·Eye, and obno:zious to the revenge ~f any that can
fmprise it. We kill other Creatures f<>I" Food or Diversion,
but Serpents arc declar'd Enemies ; we equally hate and sear
them, and theresore defuoy them with Pleasure and EagerncfS.
..
The 2d part of the Serpent's Punisliment is to go on his
Belly, and feed on Duft. How he was framed at first we
know not, but fee now that he crawls on the Ground, and
can't lift up his Head. This was a just Punilliment for his
high Attempt in opposing· himsdf to God, and teaching
Man· to question the Goodnefs and Veracity of his Maker.
As to his Food which God has here deereed to be Duft, it
was very congruous that the Serpent who had tempted our
first Parents 6y the loveliness of the Fruit of the Tree of
Good and Evil, should be condemn'd to the vilest of Meat,
and be obliged to feed on Filth and Dirt; that his Fault
might in some measure be seen in his Punisliment.
The 3d part of the Sentence pass'd on the Serpent, is
Enmity between him and Man his Lord, which continuer
to this Day, their very Natures being contrmissionary and defbuaivc
to one another. There is a perpetual War between
them, and tho' he sometimes hurts or wounds his Mafter
by surprise_in his more ignoble Parts; yet he has the worst
of it : for Man bruises his Head and essectually destroys
him. All this is literally true, and without an Allegory.
But if it be enquired why the Serpent was thus senteneed,
when he committed no Fault, but was aCl:ed by the Devil?
It must be answer'd, that he was the only visible Tempter
that appear'd to Man, and theresore the Punisliment ·was
first to fall o_n him, for Example fake, and to beget ·in us
an abhorrenee of the G~lt. The Serpent of himsdf was
no more capable of being punished than of sinning ; but
tkcfe Marks of God's Difpleasure were left on him for· our
fake, that we might have a visible Remembraneer of ·what
Sin deserves. If the Inftrpergamuments of the Temptation were
thus used, we may be sure the principal ACl:or did. not
escape the Vengeance of God. .

But 2dly, If we suppose the Devil poss'eff'ed the Serpent9
and was as· it were inearnate in it ; we may have' leave to
think that the Power of God could unite them as closdy as
our
our Souls and Bodies are joined, and cause the Punisliment
~fli&d on the literal Serpent t~ assecc Satan in it, as well
as the Injuries done our Bodies do reach our Souls ; at lea.ft
while that very Serpent was in Being.

3clly. Inafmuch as the Literal SCnfe does not exclude the
Myftical, the Curfmg of the Serpent is a Symbol to us,
and a visible pledge of the Maledia:ion with which the Devil
is struck by God, and whereby he; is become the most
abominable and miserable of Creatures. The Serpent's be~
confined to go on his Belly, points out to us the wretehednefS
of that Condition to which the Devil is reduced : his
eating Duft, the blasting of all his Enjoyments, and debarring
him from all those Pleasures that flow from the
Right-Hand of God; being thrown below the Feet of all
other Creatures, to be trampled by them ; that is to be
confined to the lowest, vilest and most miserable, as well
as most contemptible Estate. As to the Serpent'.s Enmity
with Man, it needs no great pains to apply it to the Devil.
It is plain he is continually laying Snares for us ; he lies in
AmbuJh and surprises us ; he wounds us in our Paffions
anq lower Faculties, and by these fo~etimes reach.es our
Souls: though that can never be, if we don't consent to it,
and by that make it our own Acc. But Man by the help
of the Seed of the Woman, that is by O\U" Saviour, shall
bruise his head, wound him in the place that is most mortal,'
and finally confound and destroy him with eternal ruin.
In the mean time the enmity and abhorrenee we have ot
the Serpent is a continual warning to us of the danger we
are in from the Devil, and how heartily we ought to hate
and abhor him and all his works.

2dly. As to the Woman, her Punisliment consists of two
Parts, 1ft, in the Pains of Child-bearing. v. 16. of Ch. 3 •
.And lo the Wo1114n he foid, I will greatry multipry tby·So"OfJJ
and fby Conception. /11 Sorrow thou fha/l liring forth Cbildrm.
This was a very just and proper Punilliment. She had
brought Sorrow and Death on all her Pofterity, and in
bringing them forth it w.as but reasonable she should fu.ffer
(omething of what they were to suffer all their Lives : And
it is continued on ~ those that deseend ttom her, as an 1-
. tem and Memorandpergamum of the Mifchies brought on Mankind
kind by Sin. By this 1he and her Defccndants may 1emi
how much God abhors Difobedience, and it is a Pledge to
them of God's Anger against the Guilty.
The 2d •. part of her Puni1liment is in these Words in the
fame Verse, 'l'bj Jtfire shall /Je to {by Hujbantl, and be shall
rule fJ'lJtr thee. This too was a most reasonable Sentence,
and proportionable to her Sin. Her Offence was an Attempt
to be a judge of Good and Evil for herself, to be
her own, MiftrdS, and depend no more on God for her
Government. Instead of attaining her Design, God makes
her f ubject to her Hufband ; places those Defires and Inclinations
on him which 1he had withdrawn from God, and
constitutes him her Ruler and Head. By this 1he and her
whole Sex became Subje&, and dependent on the froward
Will of those Hufbands 1he had corl'.Upted ; being obliged
to endure not only the Miseries of her own choice, but
likewise a Share in those of her Hufband's. This is a Demonstration
to us of the Folly of an Attempt to judge of
Good and Evil for ourselyes, and the great Abhorrenee
God has of Sin ; since he avenges it not only on the Perfon
immediately guilty, ·but extends the Puni1liment to the
whole Sex.

As to the Man, his Punisliment constfts in the following
Particulars, 1ft, v. 17. Beta11Je thou haft hearkened tm11
the Yoice of thy Wife, and ha.ft eaten of the 'l'ree of which I
com11111Jnded thee saying, 'Ibou shalt not eat of it; Curftd is
the Ground for thy fake. In fa"ow shalt thou eat of it all the
DtJJS of thy Life. This Punisliment is rightly adapted to
Man's Sin. He would not be content with the Meat 600
had provided for him, which the Earth of itself furnilhed
him by God's Appointment, theresore God deereed that it
1hould do fo no more, but Man should be put to force his
·Food out of it, and provide for himself with Labour and
Toil, with the Sweat of his Brows and the Anguifh of his
Heart: By this we may understand how much better it
had been to have left the provision of Sustenance for us to
God, and to depend on him for it, as well as for the GOvernment
of our Actions~ Since we would not do che latter, ·
God has refused to do the former for us.
3 'I'he
•
The 2.d. part of God's Sentence against l\lfan, is the
Condemnation of him to temporal Death, v. ig. of Ch. 3.
For Duft thou art, and unto Duft thou shalt return. It was
observed before that Man by his natural Co.nftitutiori was
Mortal, and that it was only by the especial Fayour of God,
that he was preserved from Death. Since theresore he had
forsei~ed that Fayour, he must of course fink into his native
mortality. It was not necessmissionary that God should alter
his Nature or Conftitution to make him Mortal, there
needed no more but taking away the means oflmmortality,
the use of the Tree· of Life, to subject him to Death; and
the use of it was no ways due to his Nature: God theresore
did him no lnjusti<;e by depriving him and his Pofterity
of Paradise and the use of the Tree of Life, these being
matters of Fayour, and we intitled to them only on this
condition, that our first Parents should continue in Obedience
to God. This withdrawing of God's Fayour is a
great and dreadsul Punisliment, but far from Injustice, 'be-.
cause it takes nothing from us that was due-to our Nature,
and leaves us still in a condition preserable to not being at
all, which is as much as God in strictness of J uftice is obliged
to do for any Creature. Thus we find ourselyes fobjected
to the Difpleasure and Wrath of God by our def cent
from Adam, 'fo far'as to prevail with God to withdraw
from us his peculiar Fayours that he designed for us, if our
first Parents had continued in their Obedience, the consequenee
of which is that we become fobjecr to Pains and
Miseries, to Sicknefs and temporal Death.
But 2dly. The Souls of Men are immortal, and capable
of Mifery or Happinefs after-this Life, and the Tranfgreffion
of Adam does likewise assect them, and they become
liable to Damnation on account thereof. It seems indeed
hard that God's Anger should reach fo far as to de- ,
prive all Mankind of eternal Happinefs for the Sin of one,
but if we confider Man as a free Agent, we shall find that
eternal Happinefs is not absolutely due to him, but only
the possibility thereof~ and if God has not deprived us of
that possibility, he has done us no lnjustice. And it appears
from the very History of Man's Fall, that God has
not done that: for he has entered into new Terms of Sal-
L 1 vatlon
vation with us, and has intimated them, though ob~,.
in the 3d. Ch. and 15th ver. when he declares that thl Su4
•/the Wom1111 shall mise the He.J of the Serpt111. Signifying
thereby that Mankind should not despair. For Dotwithstanding
the Devil had got an Advantage over them, jtt
by the means of Chrift they should fuWly conquer and
vanquilh him. And the World was fo fu po&a"ed with
the belief of the possibility of a Reconeiliation with God,
that they- still applied. to him with Prayen and Sacrisica;
and he gave them sufficient Proof, that ~ Mercy towan:ls
them was not quite extinsl, and that he stilJ. continued bis
Gaodnefs to the wieked Pofterity of wieked Parents. Hence
St. Paul obkrvcs, Atls 14. 16. 'l'hat tho' Gill;,, r,_, P4J
fujf er' J all Nations to wallt in their wm fD9J, yet he left 110t
bimfalf without Wit11tft in that he Jill G11aJ, and gllW as
Rai11 fro111 Htll'Um, a1111 fruitsttl Seafans, filling IJltt' l/Mlrll
with Food and GlaJnest.

But 3dly. We may conceive a double Happine&, Srft, that
which is absolute and persea, aecording to the utmost Capacity
of the Creature that enjoys it. 2.dly. That which is better
than not to be, but yet is mixed with Sufferings, and may
come as much short of persea Blefiednefs as our pn:fcnt
State is distant from perseB: Eafe and Pleasure. The latta
of these is due in J uftice to every ~that God has ma.de,
if they have not forseited their Tide by Sin. But the .6rft
of these is a Fayour that God may bdb>w on whom he
pleases, or with-hold from them upon other Confideraaions
besides guilt. The Sin of our &ft Parents is. such a Mo.rive
as has induced God to deny it to all the Pofterity of
Adam, however a&iall! Innocent. And this is a .siat la.·
dication of his Difpleasure toward them. Upon thia k·
count the most innocent Children are eternally baniiled
Heaven, and deprived of the Prefence of God, whith f!llJ
justly be-reckon'd an. eternal spiritual Death, when compared
with the Pleasures and Happinefs that otherwise thq
would have enjoyed. For though we cannot fay of them.
that it had ~ better for them never. to have been,. yet their
·Life may truly be reckoned a Hell comparatively l'O what
they might have expefled if their first: Parents had not Gt
. 2 fcodt»

Fended, and brought this Puni1liment upon their Defcendants.
Though this may seem to be very hard on Insants
that never aCtually finned, yet it cannot be calied unjust,
because ~ey are not deprived of any thing .that was abfpJutely.
due to their Nature, but only of those Fayours that
God might_ have denied them on other Confiderations be.
fides. that 9f their personal guilt. Neither doth this infer any
third State for Souls after Death, but only a Differenee
among. such as are. condemned to Hell .. There is such a
Dilfmnce acknowledged in the State of the Blessed, where
all are happy according to their several Capacities; and fo
it is in Hell, where all are miserable if compared with the ,
Condition of the . Bldfed, but in different degrees • and as
in this Life some are fo unfortunate that it were better for
them not to be at all, than to continue always in the State
in which they arc~ fo in ~ell there may be some whOfc
Condition is preserable to not being ; though for Judas and
such Sinners it h;ad been better if they had neve;r been.
The 3d part of Man's PunHliment was that withdrawJng
of the extraordinmissionary Grace of God from him, that
w.as ready to guide an<l direct him in all his Aaions, and
leaving him to his own Power and Faculties to conduct and
support him. So I understand the 22d. v. of the 3d. Ch •
. ANJ tb1 Lord God said, Behold the Man is /Jecome llJ one of
ss lo /uuJw. Good and Evil. And now least be put forth bis
.Ha111l and lake also of the 'free of Life and eat ilnd live for
_rver. ci'berefore the Lord God Jent him forth from thl Garden
.of ~dm~ _Some take this for an Ironical Si>eeclit whereby
God moeked and upbraided Man for his F'olly : -But I rather
think it, a declaration of the Divine Will : for fmee
Man had taken on him to choose for himself and to judge
what was gO<?d and evil for him without consulting hiS Maker,
theresore God resolved to deprive him of the supema-
. ~ Affist~ he design'd to afford him, and leave him
. to his natural Faculties to guide and direct him • let him be
as . it were his own God, and enjoy the fruit of his choice.
To this purpose he deprived him of the use of the 'I:'ree of
l,jfc, dr<ive him out or the Gard~n: where it w~, . and fen·
ced it against him.

The eff efu of Man's being left to his own Powers and.
Faculties for his direenon and support, are many and fatal.
It is eaf y to ihcw that from hence come all the Errors and.
Follies of our lives. For our Understandings being finite,
we are every moment at a loss, we are forced in most things
to gucfs, and being unable to find Truth, arc frequently
mifEakcn. From the fame come all the Sins, Corruptions
and Crimes that overwhdm the World. For being left to
our choice, we not only mistake, but choose ami1S. One
• Error or Sin makes way for another ; we proceed daily in
Corruption, and the lnfeeaon spreads as the World gro\lvs
"Older; Cuftom, Education and Company do all contribute
to make us worse and worse ; And in nothing of this God is
to be blamed : we bring them on ourselyes, and they are not
to be prevented without a Miracte, which none can fay, God
is obliged to work for us. We may accuse ourselyes and
one another for our temPoral and eternal Evils, but must
aequit God who has done us no lnjustice. He has allowed
us a possibility of Happinefs, as has been observed before,
and we by our Sins make ourselyes i'ncapable of it. As to
the Children that die before they come to choose, we may
be sure God will deal justly with them, and put a great dif-
. ferenee between them and atl:ual Sinners. It is Mifery and
Hell enough for them to be deprived of those Felicities to
which they could not pretend but by the Fayour of God,
and to be subjeB:ed to those Sufferings that ballance their
Being, and hinder their Lives from being a blessing to them.
They are the feed of Rebels and Traytors and c.innot expoet
any special Fayour from God.

Thus I have gone through the History of the Fall of
Man, and ihewed you the Confistency and Reafonablenefs
of the account the Scripture gives ot it. Nor ought we to
depart from the Letter thereof ; since the matter .of faet is
:plain, that Man is corrupted, that the literal Understanding
:of_ the Scripture accounts for it, and no other Book or Re-
. cord gives any tolerable reason for it. · ·
. I Jl!ight draw many usesul Observations from what I
· have said, but I shall content myklf with two .
.. . 1ft'. You may fee from this that God did not think it
·fit .that Man 1hould be absolutely happy in the State of Innocency
nocency, without Revealed Religion and the use of Sacraments.
For•the discovery of what was Good and Evil was to proceed
from a continued Communieation of Divine Wifdom,
which would have been equivalent to a Revdation ; and
the Trees of Knowledge and of Life were truly Sacramental
; they were outward and visible Signs~ and means of
Grace, which is the true notion of a Sacrament. And then
judge with yourselyes what Pride and Folly it is for any in
this corrupted Estate to pretend ·that they are too f piritual
for such, or that they need them not in order to Communion
with God; Man in his State of Perseetion needed them,
how much more must we in our prerent condition of Corruption
and A version from God ? Let \JS not theresore despise or
abuse them. Death was the Consequenee ot the violation of -
the sacramental Tree in my Text, and the fame is threatned
as the Puni1liment of our abusmg the Christian Sacraments,
I Cor. 1 1. 29. He that eatetb and drin'/cetb unworthily, eateth .
and drinluth Damnation to himself, 11ot diseerning the Lord's
- Body. For this Cause many are weak and fic'/cly among you,
1111d many jleep. The neglecting of them is no lef~ penal,
John 3. 5. Except a Man !Je !Jorn-of Water and of the Spirit,
be cannot enter _into the Kingdom of Heaven. And John 6. 53.
Except ye eat the Flejh of the Son of Man and drink his Blood,
ye have no life in you. Thefe are expreOy offered to us in -
the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, and we are sure in
that the faithsul feed on them. And though their feeding._.
may not be confined to the use of the outward Elements, -
yet whoever rejeets them, debars himself <;lf the spiritu~l
Food communieated by them : for when God ha~ appointed
Means to obtain a Blefsing, it is r-eafonable to believe
that he will never grant it to those who negleet or contemn
them.

But 2dl.y, as it is a great Folly to despise the Sacrament~,
fb it is much greater madness to think of Happinefs without
revealed Religion. It is plain we have a profpeet and
eager desire of a future Life, and in many Circpergamumstanees
there is nothing but that hope can make the present tolerable
to us. But natural Religion can neither give us any
certain clear security of it, nor means to attain it. Revealed
gives both; and the view is fo comfortable to a good Man,
Ll3 · and
..
~d (o usesul to the World, that it seems tQ ho an Imitatio1'.
of the Devil's Spite and Malice to go ~ut to ~ve ~
ofit. 'Tis this hope only can make all Men equally happy,.
arid fend the Poor, the unfortunate as to the Circpergamumstarices.
of this World, and the opprdfed~·to bed as.contented as the·
gr?test Prince. 'Tis this Qnly· that can make us chearsullJ
qupense with the Miseries and H~clihips of Life, and thinlC
of Death with Comfort. Except theresore these ·p~ns of.
niatural Religion can shew as sure ~d esse~ IDC3DS ~·
comfort us on these Occafions as Revealed Religion afford$
u,s, they,: are spitesul and unn:a.fonable ; fo~ they go about .
to take from us that which gives us pa~iencc in ow- Sickn~
relii:f in ow- ~, and ~ope in our Death~ and offer.
us nothing in lieu of it~ If a Man be opprdled by: ~
Enemies, if }:le be io Sicknefs, Pain or Anguifh, if the
~nies and Terrors of Death approach him, what Com ..
fort or Support can he have without Religion ? What ai·
difinal thing must it be to tdl a Man that there is no Hd~ ..
np Hope for him, to bid him despair and die, and there is.
an end of him. Such Restetlions may make a Man fl.ll.;
l~, mad, curse himself and nature ; bµt . can never. give
him any Satisfaaion without a wdl-grounded hope of a.
bJdfed Immortality. Now only Revelation can give the.
generality of Mankind, especially the unphilosopbic~ p311
Of. it, who are not capable of long or subtle Reafoning,
such a .clear and well-grounded hope. For we may add to
tl)is dw if we take natural Rdigion with all the Advan-uges
that Reafon can give it, yet the Rewards and ~ ..
mcnts discQVCrable by it are oot fo clear or determined, aa to
be a sufficient Encouragement to such as are good, or discouragement
to the Evil. Revealed Religion 1erves-all. tlld'e
ends ; and theresore we ought firmly to ·adhere to. it,. and·
J\Ot hearken tO. wieked and unreasonable Men; 01'. suffer
them to wrest it out of our Hands. It is our Joy, our
Comfort and our Life i it carries us beyond Death, and tecures
our eternal Fdicity. Juftice, and Charity, and Peace
~ the Fruits of it here, and Glory hereaster.
PO S'f':.

POSTSCRIPT.

T Here has lately appeared a Pamphlet entitled, a Defonce.
of Dr~ Clarice*, &c. which prose.ffes to be an Anfwer
to some part of the Notes on ABp '/(jng's Effay, and which
may , seem to rleserve some notice on account of its great
Candor and Civility ; I 1ha1l theresore take this opportunity
to declare my Sentiments of it fo far as relates to the fore-·
going Book, and will handle it as tenderly as possible.
Of Space and Duration.
(P. 2.) He begins to prove that Space must be something.
more than the Abfence of Matter, otherwise. the walls of
an empty Room would touch. The force of his Argpergamument
f~ to be this. When two things touch one another,
there's nothing between them, Ergo, when there is
Jlothing between two things they must touch. This Confcquenec
is a very lame one. The reason why they do not
touch is because they are really Jistant, but is Distance
theresore in the Abftrad: any thing real? We two differ,
Or there's a Dilferenee between us, but is Dijfe rente itself
any thing existing? Things are long, broad, thick, heavy,
&t. but are Length, Breacth, Denfity, Weight, &c. properly
any thing ? ·Have they any real .Archetypes, or external
IJeat111 Or can they exist any where but in their Coneretb
? We ate apt indeed to conceive them by way of Su!J.
stantt, or to clap an imaginmissionary Stlbstratpergamum to them, as we
do to every Thing, Q...uality or Mode, which we abftraa,
and osten impose upon oursel"es fo far as to take these for
fO many realities existing in that precise manner. wherein
we have been used. to confider them : But a little Examinadon
into the Original of these Notions, and our way of aequiring
them; deteCb the Fallacy. A small consideration
of the Nature of a!Jftratl Ideas would l think have prevented
this and the following Argpergamuments, and discovered Space,
"/)#ration and Necessity tO be nothing more.
L 14 (P.3.)

• This was wrote in the year 173 2, in answer to Mr. Clar.Els first Defence;
and as the omifiion of it in the last Edition has given occasion to
'farious conjeaures, it ii here, by the advice of Come friends, restored
to its place.

(P.3.) " Wbitenest, fays he, is widely different from
" Space; for 1ft all Bodies are not white," &c. Whitenefs
is an abftratl: Idea, which can have no Subfistanee of
itself, and fo far it agrees with pure Extenjion, which was
all the agreement between them that was ever intended.
(P.4.5.6.7.8.) I had maintained th!lt to assign posttive
Properties to Space was as bad Senfe as to apply positive
Properties to Darknefs, Silenee, Ahfence· or mere Nothing
: or in other words, that the three first, which arc
coiifessedly privations, might. with equal propriety be said
to have the properties of receiving Light, Sound, &c. as
Space is affirmed to have penetrability, or the Capacity of
receiving Body. He answers by affirming that Space has
and muil: have the property of receiving.Body, and then.
proceeds to prove at large that Darlenefs !s not properly a
Capacity of receiving Light ; (which I was fo far from asserting
that I proposed it as a parallel piece of nonsense with
the former.) The furn of his Argpergamument is this. A//Darknefs
is not capable of receivi~g Light ; he instanees in that
. Darlenefs which is ineluded within the Pores of the Particles
of Light itself, which must be smaller than a whole Ray
of Light, and consequently no Light at all can get into it.
Were this extraordinmissionary Argpergamument true, it would not prove
his point, 'Viz. that the Darknafs as Jucb is ·incapable of
receiving Light, because it assigns an external accidental
impediment in the Cafe, 'Viz. the interposition of the parts
of Matter, or (which comes to the fame) minuteness of the
Pore : But what is still worse, if matter does not constfi: of
certain primogeneal parts, but, as he fays, of such as are
" fo very small, that were we to suppose them nt'Ver Jo /mall,
"we may yet suppose them/mailer," p. 6. Then will there
be no cavity fo. minute but that we may suppose a particle
of Light commensurable to it. Laftly this Argpergamument
would prove equally against Space itself; and were I disposed
to be pleasant, I might argue that the Space supF.
fed to be within these fame Cavities is no Space, because
1t has not the property of receiving Body, i. e. 'tis too small
~o admit any kind of Body. , .
.Put I shall readily be excused for dropping this Point.
f ~e

(P:9.) He argues that'~ Infinity is not in itsalf an aB:ua1·
c' addition of finite Spaces, though all the Idea we can gee
. cc coneerning it arises from an endless addition of finite Spa"
ces, without ever being able to reach to any End:••
And then introduces Mr. Locke's Distintl:ion between the
infinity of Space and Space infinite B. 2. C. I 7. § 7.
But if all the Idea we can get coneerning this infinity of
Space arise purely from an addition of finite Spaces, then·
must it also consist or be composed of such Portions of that
Jame Space, or elfe 'tis fotnething of which we h~ve a.&ially
no Idea at all. Something beyond and beside all our 1-deas,
and ineonsistent with the method of aequiring them :
The Idea of it must be one thing, and itstlf quite different.'
Mr. Locke's Distinaion might one would think convinee us
that this Infinite of his is not a real Metapbyfical qne, but
only a mere Negation pr Non-e11J, a bare impossibility of
flopping any where ; which has nothing to do with that
·other absolute Infiruty, or rather Persetlion, which belongs
to the Divine Attributes, and all such QEalities as are men-·
surable not by Parts., but Degrees: which the fame Author
alludes to B. 2 C. I 7. § I. and in the Sect. immediately.
preceeding his ~otation.

(P.1·1.) "Space is the thing containing, and Body is that
" which is contained in it : I would not be understood by
" thing to mean a Suhstanee, which seems to be the J!lean- ·
., ing of. all. those, if they have any meaning_ at all, who
"call Space nothing.,.

But you must determine this fame thing containing to be
either a Substanee, or a Property, or find out a new Distine-.
tion for it. Till one of these be done, we are· obliged to
take it for a mere E11J. rationis, or a fiction of the Mind, ·
conceived indeed (as we said) by way of Substanee, but
which cannot be persectly reconeiled to that or any other
Category, nor proved to haYe a real proper Existence ad extra
under any Name or Notion whatsoever. By and by we·
.shall hear of its having a Suhflratpergamum, and some Properties
too, as well as being its own Suhstratpergamum.
(!hid.) " How absurd is it to conclude from our being
"' continually able to add to Space, that Space is really
'f not infinite ? Whe~eas for this very _reason it must necef"
farily
u farily fcHlow that it is infinite,· &c." i. t. negatively~
or incapable of any assignable Bounds • which is a roving,·
indeterminate> perpetu&lly ~ Idea, and direaly re·
. ~ to our Notion of absolute Infinity or PClfeClion,-
Which is something a&lal> poJitive and fixed 'in all ~al~.
ities ca~ thereOf: Something dsentially and every way.
incapable of any Addition. ThiS you allow (p. 20.) to be
the true meaning of a Me111fb.Jjic.J blfinite> the only Q..ueftiOll
theresore is which of these two Infinites (which you. fee
are Yery clliferent ones) ouaht to be apply'd to Matter,
Space and all ~alllity, and which to du! Divine Persessions •.
(P.12.) "Were it true that Space could never be fe>
" big but that more Magnitude might be a4dcd to it, it·
u wOuld then follow that it could not be posttively infinite.
" &lt how does this appear ? We can never have an Idea..
" of it fo large,. but we may still add· more to it ; but our
" Idea of it is not the 'l'bing itstlf.,.

I should be glad to find what we can know of the thing"
otherwise than from our Idea of it, (though· in the present
c:afe I believe there is no thing at all> but barely an Idea)
and if all the. Ideas we can possmly frame of it include addibility,
how 1hall we be able to exclude that fame addibi-:
lity from the. thing itself? Can Knowledge reach beyond
Ideas ? 0r can we conceive any thing to cxift in a manner
quite difFcrmt from all the possible ·ways we have of confidering
its Exiftcnce ? This is such Know~ such a
Salvo for mere Ignorance, as this Author woWd; I dare
fay, · difdaiit in other Cases, and be glad to quit in thia, if
.be C?OUld find a better Hypothef1B.

(P.13.) " Infinity is indeed an individual Attribute of.
" the Deity, fo that it is impossible that Infinity can be an
" Attribute of any thing elfe; yet were Matter infinite, it
" would not i>llow from thence that Infinity was an At"
tribute of this infinite Mallett., any more than that Ex"
tenslOll is an Attribute of all finite Beings throughout the
"whole Universe." Infinity is an Attribute of any infinite
thing, as well as Extcnfion is of every thing t:tte1111ed, i£
there be any meaning in. words. If these can be fo predical'Cd.
of Matter, they must be fo far Attributes or Properties
of it, at least while they can be prcdjcated ; in like manner·
as
;as Knowledge is a Prot>CJtY of every finite aeing ttw 11.ffe.IU
~t, thougq qot an a~f01'1tdy .neccff~, estential, or immu...
~able one, (which is nothing to the cafe) ~d ~ what otlier •
Sef\fe tqe Aqthor ~d affirlJ1 the contrmissionary below (p.14)
I do not apprehend, l'o make ExtCJ\f10n, Knowledge,&,.
Properties of God only, (~ t<> me die Jaane as making prery thing God ; fmce &nite things do as really, thougli
in a less Degree, partake of them, (and CQnsequently they
are equally assessions of their several Natu.res while thac.
Nanues continue what they are, or fo long as they Ct>11Qft.
ue to -po.ffess them, as he words it) as. the Deity himself can
l>e supposed to do. In the very (ame sense ·and for ~e · very
fame reason that the. Deity is said to occppy the w.._
~uft these be allowed to occupy fomc; part or 1hare.
(Ibid.) "If ExtensJ,Qn was an Attribute of finite Beinas.
~' if we suppose all finite Beings a~ay-itself ought to ceale.'!
When all finite tilings are away, aj1 real Extensioo goes.
with tl1em : Ideal Extension (or the abftratt Ideas of Height._
Depth, &c.) may probably remain, i.e. in YQUr Head, and
it may be hard to get them out ; but till you prove a conneaion
between such Idea$ and real;.ty, your Argpergamument
will be ineonelusive. I think it ought to be confider'd he.ce
~t KnQwledge is not the perceiving an agreement or conneCl:
ion of Ideas and Obj~, (as some seern to imagine)
but of Ideas to one another : it lies. between our ThoUghtl
themselyes, not between Though~ and T~.

-(P.15.) "A~ form infinite Being,. that I dunk is in the·
"·Power of God to create, for it dQCs not make the created
" Being either necessiuily existent or powersul, or CV¢11 give
" to him freedom of Will." But it makes him equal to hi11
Creator in some one respett, which is as bad ~ t() suppose
him equal in all. He that can suppose an Efsett ftrieruy
and properly equal . to its Caufa in any respeet, is, I uunk,
incapable of confutatiog.

(P.16.) I had argued that itr was ;•opw to applr
bounds and bounders to Non-mtity,. i, e. to Space, which
was as far as yet appeared nothing. He a.Qfwers, " In this
'~ he is ent4'ely mistaken, fur Non-entity in that We is a
, "direct Co111raditlio11." Which how it makes against tho
foregoing· AJierti~ I know not. HQwever he goes on .. J!Ovmg
ving that it is a dfreCl: ContradiClion to fay- Non-entity i11
general (and at the fame time makes use of these words,
" When any Being is created it is a mutation from Non- '
entity to Entity, &c.,,) which is equally above my comprehension
; except he tacitly subjoins the Verb is or exists
to make one ; a ~ibble I would not willingly suppose him
guilty of. .Without this, pray where's the Absurdity (I mean ·
a priori) in saying pr supposing mere Nothing or absolutely
Non-entity, or in other words, the absenee, annihilation,
non-existence of any thing in Nature? To stile this nonexistence,
&c. infinite or immense, is indeed a flagrant Absurdity,
because it is applying Properties to it, which at the
:lame time imply it to be something, i. e. 'tis making it both
famething and nothing,, which is all the Contradiel-ion that
I know of in the Supposition, and for which they only are
accountable that make it. The Pamphlet Writer was not·
perhaps fo absurd and childish (ibid.) here, as the AnfwereI," ·
may imagine.

(P.17.) "The Transtator, by his-~otation from Dr.
" Cudworth, seems to confound the Idea of Space with that
"of Npergamumber, as if they were the fame thing.,, The ~otation
is from a greater than Dr.Cudworth, and fo far from
implying Space and Npergamumber to be the fame thing, that it is
cxpresiy introduced as another parallel Cafe (Origin of E.
p.11.) i.e. parallel to the former only in the reason of their
being both incapable of Bounds, which was the Point in ·
hand, and which was there shewn to arise from the nature
of our own Faculties, not from these themselyes, 'Qci they·.
Ideas or Cf'bings. The two following Pages are, I think, ~..;'
bundantly anf wered already in the fame place. ·
(P.20.) "A Pofitive o~ Me~aphysical Infinite, ~ the
" Transiator fays, certainly mea:n.s what is absolutely per"
fetl:, that to which nothing can be added, but then this
". must always mean in the particular way tha' it is infinite.
" For instanee, an infinite Line cannot be made either Ion"
ger or shorter, but it may be made broadeJ", because it is·
" not infinite in breacth, but finite, yet it will still be an
" infinite· Line whatever breacth you suppose it. So also an·
" infinite Superjicies can never be made longer or wider,
"yet it may be made tbi&ker, &c." A positive or .absolute
infinite
infinite (in its proper subjefls) is every way incapable of
Addition ; the other infinite is direetly the reverse to whatever
you apply it. You can never imagine a Line to be
aaua.Ily fo long, but you may make it longer, ;. e. inerease
it as a Line; a surface fo broad, but it may be yet broader,
i. e. enlarged as a Surface; a Body fo great but it may fl;ill
h> augmented as Jucb: and to suppose the contrmissionary, fnZ~
any one of these to be positively infinite, fo that y;ou cannot
add to it, it co suppose what is false in faet.
Every one of these indeed is indefinitely inereafable (or
what this Author is plea.fed to call infimte) only in some
particular way, 'Viz. each in its own way. 'Tis very true
that adding to a Line does not make it broad, which would
be to make it something elfe, ;. e. a fur/ace~ enlarging a
surface does not make it thick, i. e. more than a fuiface :
But each of these may be made larger every way that we
can possibly confider them, and I think that's enough.
How an impossibility of enlarging (as also of considering)
some things more than one way, proves the possibility of
-their being absolutely infinite or perseet in another, let the
Reader judge.

The fame Reafonirig runs through the ten following
Pages, as applied to infinite Duration, and if I widerstand
it right, this is a sufficient answer.

( P. 2 I • ) " It is _true indeed that Duration is a perpetual
" Flux, yet it neither is, nor can possibly be in the Fower
~' of any Being whatsoever to add to it, to make it movet
"stower or faster, or to stand frill." We can always add
to or take from our Idea of Duration ; can confider it by
parts, and add to or substraa from it as many of these as
we please, either a parte a1Jte or 11 parte pofl (p.28.) and
thereby demonstrate the absurdity of its being aetually or
·positively infinile either way. 'Tis theresore but improperly
and negatively fo, " it can only mentiri infinitatem, as C11d"
worth fays, in its having more and more added to it infi~'
nicely, whereby notwithstanding it never reaches C?r over"
takes it." p.647,648. And if this be the nature of om
·Idea, I should be glad to know how it can be made appear
that it is not likewise the nature of the Ideat11m or thing ilself,
(if there were one in the present cafe). or indeed how it can
ever
·ever be proVed rhit here is ~y thing at ail, Wide afl MJ.
tificial.or abftraa Idea: An Idea of· Duration in gmera/1
fi:t up by the Mind as a common Measure and Receptacte
for all things which exist in a successive manner, or do tnJ.
..,, and which is of great use to us ih our way of confider'"
.ing ~ : though wlien it is carried into abiolute Infinity;
and supposed to be placed beyond ~ possibility of Inerease,
it becOmes an ineonsistent self-contractiCl:ory Idea:. as will be:
sarther 1he\vn when he comes to an infinite series. p. I 1 o, & t.
(P.24.) He argues that fmce God existed frrim all Eternity
he cowd aCl: from all Eternity; Creation is an Aa, ergfi
he could have created from all Eternity, otherwise he ex_
isted a whole Eternity a parte ante before he had the Powet
of creating, i. e. he wa.s an impotent Being, a _whole Eternity.
An/. PfJ'fller the F11adty, and the aCl:Ual Exer&ife of that
-Power are two different things. God might always have th.a
power, will and intention to create, yet not always exert his
~, and put that Will and Intent in execution ; nay one
·Of these must in the order of our Ideas be previous to di_c «her : His Being and efi'ential Attributes must be eternal~
uncaused, or (as this Author fays) beginningless; his ACl:s
must be in time, or have a beginning ; . every Change, Atl
or Effetl is posterior in conception to the PfJ"JJer changing;
the 4e111 or Cause ; and to make them coeval, is to make
them all the fame, ;, e. is no more the Object of any power;
than to make two thinp one and the fame while they are
two-different ones. 'Tis no defeCI: theresore in God's power
not to be able to txet'&ifa it ab iter110, any more than not
ro be able to make a Change without beginning. Neither.
do these A& or Excrcifes of the Divine Attributes make a
Change in the Divine N'ature, or the .Attributes th1111fel'Ues;
as this Author supposes; (p.25, &c.) any more than every
motion pr00uced or volition exerted by a free self-deter ...
mining Principle, aiters the N aturc of this Principle itself;
oe every aenon of a Mao aiters his Conftitution.
La.illy, If every aa of Man as such is tempormissionary and
nq\Mes bqpnning, th.e cafe must be the. suric in God,
efpCc:ially iB those Aets of his wlUca relate to Man himself •
,tirhecwife, and indeed for the Wne reason, every Divine Ad:
~~or asy thing elk: must be eternal : .He made /
. Us
119 all then from ·Eternity, and every aa of Providetia:
which coneerns the preservation or the government of us is
likewise eternal, and that a1fo which is to be and wiU. bne
· time hence coneern our Pofta-ity, is, and mu.ft needsarilJ
be eternal ; for otherwise there would be a change in God.
. You fee ·whither .your Principle will lead ua.
. (P.2.6.) He fays" how Goa<lOUlcl aeatefroin Eternity ap"
~ to us very ef#rd qd .ItnoJ itllpl.JNk11 (though he
· had just before been labouring~ prove that the Deity both
could. and mufl: do iO) to which I ~ theresore for any
thing that we know, or as far as we can fee, it is absurd
and impoLfible ; except we can be .certain of any thing beyond
the reach and against the representation of our owa
Ideas ; a certainty which tJae Gentlemm in this way cf
thinking are ofteri reduad 10. "'· p.u.. 29. f.#e.
(Illiti.) He ol?jcCi:s that Dr. Bt111Jejs Argpergamummts agaimt
i'lfilliti Ge11erotias are contrmissionary to the Suppositim; bCCause
they imply some first. or · Jegi1lllillg. Aii.C they impl.1 ancl
thew the necefiity for a beginning and theresore owzthrow
t:he Suppo.6.tion. ·If whateVer is now pd was once preint,
and every affiwiable part in this faole Sns was and mu1I:
be fQ; the Corueqpergamumce is that it cannot but have a Jrjl, .and
theresiin is an absurd, mconfaftmt Supposition. Instead of
mnfurlng this.and the· like .Argpergamuments, you answer "they
" are grounded on a wrong &fis, bccaufo mey deftmy the
'' Suppo&ioil :~' i.e. We mUft allow the poil°tbility of the Supposttion,
bc:torc we can shew it l'O ~ impossible, and ever:f
mgpergamument which pnm:s it to be abfwd is false and f~
.because "tis contrmissionary to .the poitiou, which is supposed al- ,
-ttady l'O be trUe. i. e· We.argue~ except we_~dw:
~eftion. This is· die Subft:ID.ce of most of bis mdonillg ia
.the · ~ Traa.stator's Dcmonstration examined" which may
perhaps be re-examin&:d in its proper place.

(P.27.) He urges that, "mcfe.Argpergamuments will equally
· ·" prov~ against the &istence of the Deity mma '11 Eller~
-Aity;11 which is. already obviated.. in R. c.

(P. 30.) · His. next Argpergamument a tlm infinity. of Spati
.stands thm. " A Body in motion can never come to an. end
· :-'' of Sp~ Ergo Space is positiYdy infinish :'".rather the
· .cootrmissionary, Ergll. Space is incapable.ofpositive Infinity,. or if
it
it is any thing at all, yet the Infinity of it cannot be .considered
in a positive absolute way ; it is something indeter- .
minate and negative (as has been osten repeated) and theresore
to have a positive conception of it is a Contradiction.
That we have a positive and adequate Idea of the true in-.·
finity in its proper St1bjeets has been shewn already. ·

( P. 32.) Dr. Green had argued that a M.athematical Solid,
or mere Length, Breacth and 'Ibiclenefs, was the Definition
of Space, but these were only imaginmissionary, and theresore fo
'Was Space itself. He replies " This is rather a mental Con"
fideration of real Space." But if we can find nothing elfe
to confider in it, nothing that leads us beyond these three
abftra...'l: Notions aboyementioned, by what medipergamum will
you prove its reality ? shew it to be something more than
mental, to be attended with any consequenee, or to exhibit
any appearance which properly implies or requires real Existence,
and is not fully folvable by the Mind's power of
Abftrad:ion and force of mere imagination. He adds, " for
"ifthere were no distanee existing really, the Sun and Moon
must be in the fame individual Place." This is the fame
~bble we fet out with, and it is sufficient here to observe
that if there was nothing in the World beside these two, and
mere Distanee or Space, they would be properly in no Place
at all (i.e. no absolute Place) nor could they be said ever
to change Placocs, except in relation to each other.
It is to no purpose to answer what he fays in the following
pages coneerning the Impossibility of defining Subfi:
ance, till we are better agreed about the meaning of the
• word. It may indeed be an impossibility with him who has
something to define beyond his .Ideas, who ineludes some.
what in the Substanee of a thing above and beside all its
constituent Properties. I have given my own Notion of it·
as clearly as I can in Note I. 2d. Ed.

(P. 36.) "If a Spirit is unextended, it must exist in no
" place, and is theresore incapable of Motion. For if it can ,
" move, it must either move or go out of one place into a-
"' nother, or out of no Place, into some Place, or lastJy out
"or no Place into no Place, &c." And again, "that a
" Spirit has the power of moving is very manisest, or elfe
." the ~oul ofa Man would be very osten a hundred Miles
2 ex"
distant from his Body." If matter be incapable of Thought
{a~ I think Cudworth has fussi.ciently demonstrated in the
passage cited below) the reason is because it has Parts; i. e.
is extended, consequently a thinking Substanee cannot be
extended or made up of Paro, and if fo, it has nothing to
do with either Place or Motion, any more than with a Shape
or Colour. It may a.a on and influence a Body which exists
in Place, but to apply Place, where, &c. (terms which
peculiarly belong to Beings extended) to itself, is joining
the most disparate, heterogeneous things in Nature. u I
would not, fays he, mean that the Soul is extended in the
fame manner as Matter is." ib. But if all the notion we can
possibly frame of Extension is derived from Matter and
cannot reach beyond it ; if the very Definition and Idea of
it ineludes partes extra partes (real parts, when it is fo, mental
when it is only mental) as he might have learnt from
Bayle cited above ' it will be in vain to fly to the old refuge
of a simple uncompounded Extension, or what he calls
Continupergamum ; which is indeed extended, but yet in a different
manner from all the Extension we know of; which
has assignable Parts, but not material, separable ones; i. e.
properly no parts at all.-But this is not the .first time we
have been forced to go beyond our Ideas.

( P. 3 7.) " Though we frame our Idea of a Being from
"' die essential Properties of it, yet that is·no reason why .
" the Being fhoul~ not require something to its Existence
" which the essential Property (he should have.said Proper"
ties) does not, only by the Being's requiring it." By
Being or Subjlance we mean only the ColleCtion, Aggregate
or Union of the Efsentfal or constiment Properties; and how
these when taken together can-require something which each
of them did not require when separately considered, I do
not apprehend. The Properties of Spirit, i.e. thi~king,
willing and their Joo/lodes, have no relation to Space or Extension,
have nothing to do with a Sub.stratpergamum, consequently
neither h!ls a f piritual Being which consists only of these
·and the like Properties. He goes ·on supp<>fmg that ·all
Beings must as such be commensurate to Space, and occupy
foine · portion of it ; as .well as every ~alitj be stuck iq
Mm some
ff>me S1'bjlratpergamum, which also must take up some room ; all
which has been considered in the place referred to above.
I shall trust the pafi'age 'from Cudworth with the Reader,
only observing that after the words " least Extension that
can_ possibly be'" Cudworth has "if there be any such lea.ft,
~'and Body or Extension be not infinitely divisible" p. 825.
which was omitted in the Quotation.

(P. 46.) "It necessarily tallows that the Soul is extend~'
ed, because were it not, it would, as Dr. Cudworth fays,
"perceive all Distanees indistantly, and consequently
~'would have an Idea of Infinity." He means, would fee
~ the End of all Distanee, or perceive the end of what is
1ndless, according to his Senfe of the word infinite. He
had argued p. 41. that an unextended Being must be fo
fota/J as to perceive nothing, here from the fame principl~
he urges that it will be fo great as to be able to perceive
every thing, and indeed both his Argpergamuments are equally
conelusive. · The Limitation of our Sight in every cafe "is,
I think, owing to the Nature of Body, not of Soul.
(P. 47.) "Tosuppose any thing to be annihilated is not
" to suppose it to be taken away from itself or from /Jeing
" or from &i}lmte, but more properly Existence taken
"from that." I wilh he had 1hewn the differenee of these
Phrases.-

But we have enquired into the possibility of annihililtiot1
already, and he comes at last to allow it in every thing but
Space itself, to which indeed it cannot be well apply'd, any
more than to nothing itself. - .

(P.49.) " That Dr. Clarke afi'erts Space to have real
" QEalities is true ; but then he does not confider it
" strialy as a P1'operty, but as its D'Wn Subjtratpergamum." I will
" anf wer this when I understand it. If he means considering
it tll a Suhjlance, Dr. Clarke and he confider it very
differently at different times, See p. 1 1. and in p. 63, the Dr.
, is introduced affirming the Deity himself to be the Su/Jftralpergamum
of Space.

(P. 50.) "I do not fee fo much absurdity in suppofmg
" ~alities inherent in one another, as the Transtator would
" make it, at least not in the Instanee of Sp11ce.· For why
~, cannot Penetrability, Indisccrpitility and !n/inil] ~ wd to
be
ca be Modes ofSpaee? as well I think as all kinds of Shapes
"are Modes or Modifications of Figure."
But Figttrt itself is nothing exelusive of every particular
Shape, Ergo fo is Extension setting aside every particular extended
Being : unless we must have a Substratpergamum likewise
for Figure and Form in general; and by the fame way of
reasoning we may seek. one for Weight, for So11nd, &c. in ge.neral
: in short for every abstract Idea we have. " Dura"
tion, fays he immediately after, is only enduring, and
" what can enduring be without something to endure ?"11
Anfw. A mere E1u rationis or Idta, as well as your next.
Instanee of Exijltnce without something existing : Which
one would think might be enough to shew you that these
neither require nor can properly admit of any real Subftratwn,
nor infer the exi~ence of any thing but our own ima ...
gination. To what purpose theresore 1hould we spend time
in enquiring whether Duration be a puntlpergamum flans, or " a
~'continual regular stowing of itself"" p. 51 ? When we al~
ready find that it is nothing more than a complex Idea goc
from observing the Succefiion of Ideas in our Minds ? one
who confiders how he comes by his Ideas will never build
such Argpergamuments upon them.

( P. 5 3.) " It is very evident that neither Ex:tension nor
" Duration can be modes of the Existence of any created
" Beings." Extension and Duration in the AbftraCt: can be
modes of nothing at all ; but our Ideas of them are entirely
got from created Beings, and applieable to no other• and
.to them they must be applieable fo long as we can properly
fay these Beings are extended or do md1tre.
(P.55.) "Succefiion is not, fays the Transiator, necef..
" farily joined with Existence. .Perhaps .not, that is not
4' such a Succefiion as ours." Here we are goc ag~in to
10mething Supra 11os. I would only ask, is not all Succcfiion
the fame as facb 1 is not Succession without a Chan~
the very fame as no Succession? Neither Change indeed
nor Succession are the very Idea of Dura,,tion (as this Auther
would have me affirm) but yet they necelfariJy accompany
it, and without.them it is absolutdy loft.
(P.57.} "What the meaning of present in his simpk
'~ Ejmct t1J is, -l confess I do not understand." The
M m 2 Phr.&f e.

Phrafe is Dr. Clarke's, 6th Prop. par. ·the last : where he
may find another full as hard to understand, 'Viz. that the
Deity is ~ually present - by the immediate and per/en E:xereise
of all bis .Attributes to t'Very Point of the boundless Immmfity,
as if it were really all /Jut one jingle Point. p. 7 4. 2dEdit.
(P.61.&c.) He builds his Proof of the real Existence of
Space and Duration on the Ideas we have of them, which,
he fays;· are simple ones, and " we cannot by any means
" have a simple Idea but from something aCtually existing
"in.Nature." Firft, the Ideas of Space and Duration in the
Abftraet are not simple Ideas, but complex Modes made up
of the least Portions of each, 'Viz. a sensible Point and Moment.
SeeLoclce,B.2. C.1.5. S.9. Secondly, if they were,
they would not prove the Existence of any. external ObjeCl:
corref pondent to them, but only that there is something in
Nantre which occasions them; whether that be positive or
a privation in the SubjeCl: does not always appear. See
Loclce, B. 2. C. 8. I gave you an Instanee before in Darlmtfs,
which is as able to produce a simple Idea, as Space, and }"et
you have taken a dt:al of pains to prove that it is really nothing
: You might as well have added Space and Duration
to it; and if you had a ·mind too, coneluded them to be
three Nothings. p. 61.

But I shall need an Apology for dwelling fo long on this·
dry Subjetl:.

Of Ntcejfmissionary Exijlenee.

(P. 66.) He begins his Account of nece1fmissionary Existence
with the following Observation. " We may be able to
" know and perceive in what Beings this necessity of Na-
. "ture inheres without knowing either the Nature of this
"Necessity, or the Nature of the Beings and Substanees in
" which it inheres. Thus we can. fee that two and two are
"necessarily eq~al to four, &c." What! though we do not
know the nature of two and two, or understand what these
Words mean ? as the Course of his Argpergamument tnuft require.
What .follows is, I think, mere quibbling on the two
·Words Necessity and Contradi!lzon. The Cafe, in short, is
this. Wherever there is an apparent Contradienon on one
· '(lde of the ~eftion (either a priDri or pojleriDri) the opposite
fitc is nccclrarily true, or there is a NetdfilJ for our sup. ·
posing it: but except this Contradistion be perceived a p,.;.-·
ori, i.e. prior to the existence of the thing or truth in Queftion,
it does not malee it to be what it is, it cannet be the
groud of its Existence. Thus from the absurdity of an infinite
Series of dependent Beings we nod it necessmissionary to suppose,
or there is a Necej/ity for our suppofmg, one first Cause
or independent Being: But is this fame Necessity theresore
something by which he exists ? something which may be
considered as an antecedent gr(Jtlnd or reafan of his being
what he is, i.e. uncaused or independent? At this rate eve_,
ry Realon . which reduces us to a necessity of belieying
the; existence of any thing, must be the Cause, Ground or
Reafon of the Thing inelf: which I think needs no Con•
futation.

(P.67.) He goes upon a distinetion between Neccffity a/J.:.
fo!.te and relati'Oe: whereas every Notion we can possibly
.6x to the word Necej/ity implies Relation, and means nothing
more than the connection we find between two or
more Ideas, which is usually expressed by this Term, as
was shewn of all the common Senfes of it in Note 9. If
theresore this word can only stand to denote the Habitude
or Manner of our own Conceptions, it will be in vain to
proeeed with this Author in enquiring whether it is really
uniform and i11'1Jariable ; or whether its existence be confined
to Time and Place. p. 68, &c.

(P.79.) He maintains that theBeingwhichexiils by Ne~
cessity can be but one, and attempts to answer a very reasonable
Objestion arising from his first Affertion aforecited,
-viz. that as Necessity of Existence is beyond our Comprehension,
and the Being or Beings to whom we apply it are
fo too ; there may be a npergamumber of necelfarily e;xistent
Beings,. as well as different Necessities, for any thirtg that
we know. "If fays he, in his. reply to this, a.'ly· Being
"whatever exists necelfarily by a Nec~ffity of Nature, it
" must be both impossible and con~story in itse//,.· ( 'V•
"below, and p. 74.) independent of, and antecedent to
" all our Suppositions about it, that that Being should 1101 .
"exist. Whatever Npergamumber theresore of needl'missionary.Being$
" there is, there is necefi,'arily such a Npergamumber, and neither
· Mm 3 more
''more or lcfs is possible, &c." ;. 1. there can be no more
than there really are. · But how do you know by this w~·
Npergamumber there are ? or where is the Absurdity ( /1 priori) ·of
suppofutg more than 'one such ? Your argpergamument will fcrvc
as well for twenty : 'Viz. provided we allow them all ~o be
in rmtt111Ultw11 necessmissionary, then none of them cari be supposed
away.

(Ibid.) "The Objeaion theresore in its full force can"
not be ~ any sarther t~ this, that a thing may be
" in itself a persetl: Contraditl:ion, without appearing to us
c' to be any Contraditl:ion at all, but rather die quite con.
"trmissionary. In answer to this I must beg leave .to fay thar
cc then all our Understanding is usele.fs, all our KnoWledge
" and Reafon, & t ."

What this has to do with the former Objeaion, or who
is capable of making such an one, I leave him to confider:
We fay there is no Contradiffion to our Ideas' in suppof-.
ing more than one independent Being, and theresore the
contrmissionary cannot be demonsuated. The answerer here. is
got on the wrong fide, and answering his own asti:rtion in
the last cited Pafsage. It is he only, and the Gentlemen
in the fame way o1 thinking, that are obliged to find Contradi&
lions i11 themsel'1es, which yet are not such to any of
•11r Ideas, and who alone theresore are· chargeable with the
Consequenees he sets forth below. The true and proper Qb.
jetl:ion to his Demonstrations of the Unity is, that we have
no Dat11 to proceed upon in proving one fide or the other.
(P.75.) "Necessity of Existence---can only be where
cc there is no other Cause or Foundation of that Existence.,.
The true meaning of which is, that this kind ofNecessity
can never come in but where a PerfOn has nothing elfe
to fay. T~t existence which has no prior, external Calli;
is absolutely uncau5'd. I know no other distinetion.
(P.76.) "An Obje&r may indeed fay that a Being
" ean exist without any Cause, any Ground or Foundation
e1 at all. To whith I must desire to answer that nothing
" can be more abf urd and rontradiaory, and that it is-"
all owing merely to Prejudice and Partiality ; fmcc to in:.
" stanee in things which aWetl: our lenses daily, they will an
cc allow that if there is no reason why a thing (the World
"suppose
u suppose) is of this or that particular lhape, .it m'ight:have
" been of some other shape than what it now i$."
The two Cases are very different, as was 1hew;11 fusticiently
in Note 14. The World, which we supP<>fe to have
had beginning, might for that reason either have not been
at all, or been of a different 1hape, &e. from what it is.
That which never had beginning was never under a pofilbility
of not being, or of being any thing elfe but what it
always actually was. H~re is no essect, nothing that wants
support, consequently no room for any Cause or Ground.
(P~ 78.) "Here I must desire the Reader .to take no"
tice that when any thing is said to be fit, right, reafan"
a/Jle in itself, it is only meant that the fitness of it does
" not depend upon the will of any Being, but is a necessmissionary
" consequenee of the existence of that thing of whkh it is
"affirmed." Butfitnest is evidently a rclativ.e term and must
have referenee to some End. Whatever is fit must nece1farily
be fit for something. Fit in itself is theresore both a
solecism in Expresilon, and a mistake of means for End.
(l/Jid.) "Thus it is absolutely right, right and fit in it·
" self, antecedent to a~y Command that a Creature 1hould
"reverenee his Creator: where can be any absurdity in this
" Proposition ? Is not the relation between a Creature and
" Reverenee to his Creator suitable to the natures of each of
"them?" . ·

It is f uitable to . the nature of the 1 ft as productive of its
Happinefs, and .to that of the 2d as agreeable to his WiU,
who originally designed the.Happinefs of his Creatures, and
theresore bound this and the like Duties on them. As
theresore it naturally . conduces to this end it is fit, &c. an ..
tcoedently to any positive Command about .it : But what
means fit, right, &c. without regard to any End at all ?
This is the absurdity we justly charge upon the Authors of
that Language.

(P •. 85.) "Not having hac\ a Beginning, or having ex"
isted from all Eternity neither does, nor possibly can make
, ''a Being neceJEuily existing." This Being does not. want
to. be 111aile fo at all.
Not having had a beginning is no Reafqn indeed a priori
why a Being 1hould be necessarily existent, but it is a very
Mm4 good
good one drawn /1 pojleriori, and implies it by necclTmissionary
consequenee, which is enough for us. His instanee of a
Ballance hanging uneven from all Eternity, would indeed
be contrmissionary to the present Laws of Nature; but except we
presuppose the establisliment of such Laws (which I imagine
this Author does not believe · absolutely necessmissionary)
there will be no reason why it should not hang in that as
well as any other position, and it would be a sufficient account
to fay it always was fo.

(P.8~.) "There is ~o Im~bility ~n suppofi~ creat"
ed Beings to have existed Eternity, proVIded the.y
"have some original Cause.', That is, as far as I can apprehend,
provided they have some heginning. A Cause coeval
with its Effetl: has been already considered.
Ibid. " The Word Cause as he uses it, cannot possibly
" mean any thing but an Efficient Cause, and if fo, I readily
''grant his Consequenee to be true.,,

I should be glad to know what other fort of Cause will
serve your purpose, i. e. infer Unity, lmmenjity, &c. and
perform those operation.r which Dr. Clarke fo frequently ascribes
to it. See his Anfwers to the 3d and 6th Letters.
Ibid. " To fay that because such a Being could not begin
"to exist, he must theresore always have existed, i.e. does
" necessarily exist, is as abf urd as one can imagine. Where
~' is the connection of the Propositions l No more I think
" than if a Perfon should tell me that because a Being will
" certainly exist from this time to all Etemity, that such a
" Being is theresore fdf-existe~t!'

If -he now is and could never hegin to be, is there any
other possible Consequenee but that he must have always
been ? And is not the contrmissionary a Contradiaion in Terms ?
Whether a Being which depends on the pleasure of some
other will certainly exist for ever, is a very different ~eftion.
The Deity could never derive his Being from any thing;
Ergo he must be underived, i. e. independent, i. e .. selfexistent
: I add, and also necessorily exi.ftmt; but of this below.
(P.-87.) "If there never had been any Cause; Reafa11or
" Foundation, why the thing was what it was, I should be
" glad to know how it came to be what it was, and why it
" was not something elfe ? ,, ,
le
It never tame lo oe : there never was any room for a
Cause, &c. It was not something elfe because it always a&!":'
ally was what it is, and never under a possibility of being
otherwise.

(P. 88.) "To affirm that the fopreme Being has no
" Ground or Foundation for his Existence, is the most ab"
surd thing in the World ; for if he has no reason for his
" Existence really in Nature, it is impofilble that it should
"' imply any Contradiaion· not to suppose him ever to have
" existed. If it does imply. a Cont~adiction n?t to suppose
" some one necessmissionary self-existent Bemg, then is the. ground
" or Cause pf its being a Contradiction not to suppose such
" a one, the reason why he d,oes.:exist rather than not exuV'
It implies no Contradicti,on a prim (as was 1hewn before)
to. suppose the Deity not to have existed always : How the
absurdity IJ pojleriori (or the ground of its oeing an abfartlity
if it has any such ground) viz. that there never could have
been any thing, or that the U niverse must have arose from
nothing; how .this, I fay, can be the reason why, or bj
which G9<l exists, I leave to this Gentleman to aplain.
Though in truth he does not seem to have once considered
the two different kinds of ReafanJ, or Contraditlions, touched
on above.

(lb. and 89.) "To fay that he necessarily exijls lSecause
" he always did exin, is the fame as to fay that he necessa"
rily, exijls becauf~ he does exijl." We don't pretend to
assign any Cause, or (which must always mean the fame,
if it answers any purpose in the present ~eftion) Reafan of
his Existence ;, but only the Cause or RCafon why we believe,
or by which we know that he must necessarily exist :
and if he be the first of all Causes, underived from, and independent
of any, i.e. (in our sense of the Word) Jelf-existent,
all which~ Consequenees of his Eternity; to suppose
his Bei~g at any ri1,11e altered or destroyed by, or witho1;1t a
Cause, 1s an absurdity, and by consequenee affords fussiaent
ground for the contrmissionary supposition. I hope you fee the differenee
between this and the argpergamument you have been
pl~fed to make. for us.
(P .. 89.)." Never having begun to exist cannot make a
"Being incapable qf ceasing lo exijl."
le
k annot, as we said before, mUl him· fo by dirett lt.ffe·
tieJJCJ, or in any sense a priori; bW: it does by just i11fern1e'
and implieation, or • pojleriori; or at least makes the thi:ng
appear fo to us in every cafe, which is as far as we need go.
· ( P. 90.) " Though it is true that it requires no effident
•• C11ttfe to keep in the state it is, yet if there is no ground
•~or reaJOn why it should g1 1J11 to exist, that itsClf is a
relisoB why it may eease to exij... The differenee lies here, ·
e.rie ·.of diem ia properly an eff1 11 or C#Jd11ge which tu facb,
and· as such Mt,, requires a Remn; the «her not. There
cm be no '.kind of antecedent Reafoo why an independent
Being -continltf!S in the fame f.bate in which it always was~
or as this Author phrases it, goes on toaift; any more than
why he is in~ependent, or vhat he is; and to want ;\11 an- .
teredent Rea.foil where there is nothing to be P'used, is I
shink, the very fame as wanting one where it has nothing .
to· do, or where there's no occajio11 for it.
·(P.92,93.) ~' Should we suppose all &ings Out of the
n Univcrfe er not existing, save one,. to suppose that one
'' Being away implies a Contradiffion : but why ? Bccause
"to foppose t!hat one away is to suppose an infinite_Nothing,
o 'Which -is a plain Contradiction."

You might as well urge that it is a Contradiction to
suppose any dling away if we leave nothing in the ,.,om of
it. Infinite has no more to do with this fame Notbi•g, than
flnin pmetra/Jle, &c. have - But we have had this argpergamument
once before.

(P. 94.) "If it is a Contradiaion not to suppose some
"' one Being to exist, that Being exists by fi>nie necesilty
a in its own Nature, which necessity having no respett or
" relation ·to any thing ·external, must be a Necessity ab"
fa/Ille m it.self, that is a N ecessity which has no depen._,
danee upon any thing whatever, but is in itsdf absolutely
• that which it is."

If it be a Contradiaion to suppose the absenee of some
one Being, d<>eS this give you the reafan why, or the ground
'Y which this Being eXifts? Nay, if in the present Cafe his
Existence be founded, as you fay, on a Necessity which
has no·· dependanee upon any thing whatever,. I should
be glad to fee h6w any thing will lead ·us to this Founda:.·
ti on,
tion, .or ho.w we can ever find it out. Jn· truth, the belt: account
of it will be to fay, 'ti~ something ffli gmeris, or
ahsalutely that which it is, and there I'm willing to leave ir.
( P. 96.) " That this ground of Exift:ence fuould be the
" Sub.stanee itself, no body was eyer fo weak as to imagine:
" but that theresore the Existence of the Being must be
c' pre-fopposed to the Existence of the .Attribute, and that
"theresore it cannot be pre-supposed to the Existence of
" the Su/Jjlance, is one of the greatest Difficulties ·our present
"QEeftion labours under." ,

(P.97.) "When theresore a Substanee is pre-supposed
"to the existence of the estential Attribute, or when one
" of the dsential Attribut~ is pre-supposed to the Exift"
ertce of the S1i/Jjla11ce, the Word before is only meant in
" the order of our Ideas, and not in the order of the things
". themselyes." But except you suppose it previous in the
order of Nature too (which is indeed ineluded in the former
supposition) it cannot serve your purpose, ;, e. be with
any tolerable propriety the real foundation, and a priori infer
the Existence of the Substanee and all its other Attributes
: Whic\1 supposition you are indeed forced to make
in the next Sentence. ·

Ibid. " So that when we suppose this Necessity to be thC
" ground or foundation of the existence of the self-exist:ent
" Being, we do indeed pre-suppose it (i. e. suppose it to be
''¥tally an~ in order of nature previous, or this is not sense)
"to that existence, when in reality it is coeval." What
other Consequenee can be drawn fiom this, but that the
Supposition is a false and groundlefS one, and all the Argpergamuments
founded thereon, fallacious. The foregoing P~ges,
I think, explain themselyes. '

( P. IO I.) " To fay that this Necesstty ""'JI le bJ flJdY of
~' Causality, or we ca11fix 110 mmmer of Idea to the Words is
~'mere trisling, as if there cou'd be no ground or Reafon
" of existence in any Being unlefS that Ground or Reafon
" were the aChial producers of the Being, which is as absurd
" as is possible.'' There can be no kind of a111ecetlmt Reafon
for an Existence when there is nothing that can atlually
cause, produce, or at all assed that Existence~ (as in the
prtsent Cafe:) cxc:ept you?ll have an antecedent reason why
3 it
4 it is uncaus'd, or why it needs no producer, which wou'd
be trisling indeed.
(llJid.& 102.) "I ask why he cou'd not but always have.
"existed? The answer should be, that it is and always
''was a Contradiaion. I ask theresore once more, why it
" is a Contradiaion to suppose him not to exist ?11 The
proper Queftion I think, here should be, What is· that
Contradictioft ? (\Vhich has been osten answer'd) not wb]
it is one ? However he goes on to prove that there must
be a reason or ground for every contractiClion. A cause why
the fame thing cannot be and not be at the fame time (p. 1 oo,
101.) Why 2 and z do not make 5; i.e. you must have
a n:afon for· the very first principles of all reason, or a Cause
why some of your Ideas differ and others agree, or elfe he
will tell you tbf:y lllight not have bem fa. He. that can fee the
necc:ffity for this-may I suppose apprehend the necessity f6r a
Cause or Ground of all Causes and Grounds whatsoever, and
another for that, and will fee no reak>n to stop any where.
(P. 104.) "I ask again why God is that greatest and
" •ft f.perior Being which they suppose him ? What an"
f wer can they m~e to that ? If they are consiste~ with
"themselyes, they must fay, that he.is the greatest Being
"because·he existed from all Eternity. But then again w)ly
'' did he exist from all Eternity ?" I might as well ask why
this Necessity of yours is that most wondersul thing which
you suppose it to be, · or why it is antecedent to the first
Being. We know him to be thegreatejl from his Eternity,
why he is eternal we know not, (a priori) but this we know
that if there were any ground really and truly antecedent to
his existence, he cou'd .not be eternal ; which is enough to
ove~ your Foundation. What this Author adds in pagu
·106, 107. about the .Causes of the determination of the
Divine Will has been ¢onfider'd in the latter part of Note
53· 2d Edit.

'!'he 7'ranjlator' s Demonjlraiion examin' d.
To confider minutely what he has advaneed on this Head
wou~d be to repeat every 'thing which went ~fore coneerning
an· .Jn.finite ferils,. Eternity of the World, Caufa and
Ejfen eoe71al, 4bsalute Infinity without "11J eritl, tie. He
that
'that has once thorouglily retl~aed on such principles will
not require a second Confutation of them,.
(P. 110,.111.) He labours to maintain the possibility of
an infinite series of successive Beings against all those argpergamuments
which. shew that either fomc one part of it was not
fucccfiive to others, or that roery part of it was, both which
destroy the supposition, " and theresore, fays he, they are
"' nothing to the purpose. For in a series of Beings existing
" from Eternity down to this present Time, there could bC:
H .no first, nor could there be a time when none of them
" did Exift, for then these wou'd not have Existed from
" Eternity,,. But there is no one of them which was not
once future, Ergo there must have been a time when none
of them did exiil:, Ergo tht7e was a first; and consequently
the supposition contractifu itself. He goes on " Let us then
'"'suppose a series of Beings to begin to exist now, and
~that they will exist to all Eterniry, would any person be
e& fo absurd as 'to foppose that there must be some one not
"prl'DiotlS to any other, (I suppose he means fu/Jsequent to
"all others,) that is, that there must be a /aft 1" We may
add, and would any person be fo absurd as to call such a
perpetually growing series positwely or a/Jfalately infinite ! or
conceive it as any whole or entire thing r.eaJly exijling ? 'Tis
an indefinite flux or asoaregate of parts which are continually
added, but never malee up any thing at all; which is absurd.
kc Note 1 o. 2d Ed. Below he attempts to bring this series
off by alferting that it is infinite 0111 waJ, but finite another ;
which seems to me the fame as affirming ·it to be partly
infinite; and partly finite but we examin'd this before.
(P. n8, 119.) "That other Beings besides the tels-ex"
istent Being might have been eternal has been befon:
~' proved, though they would not be in the fame manner
" as He, because they would equally be dependent as if
" they had not existed from Eternity." i. e. they would depend
.on the self-existent Being for d1eir original, or derive
their Bei!1gs from something pre-C:O~t, ~d yet be ~I .eternal,
which appears to me somethlng like a Contradiaion.
Here the Defender of Dr.. C/4rlce seems. to be in some
confusion. He begins " There's no impossibility in an end"
lcfs fc:ries of dependent Beings existing from Eternity. For
as
•as Dr. C/4rle fays, If we confxler such an infinite Pro"
greffion as 0111 mlirt mJltfs series of Jtp_mdint Beings it '5.
• plain this flJIHJle series can have no Cause from witllo•I, or
"from fllithi11 &e." ·aru1 fo produces the Doctor's Demo~
iration direaly against hirilself, and when he has done,
fays " this is a true., if not the only reason-why it is im•
f<>'Fible, that there 1hould have existed from Eternity
':' such an infinite i11Jtpmtl4111 series •• though how he comes
to allow this fame &ies., whether it be Jept1Ulmt or i111k'
jt111Je111, to be confider'd here by the Dr. as 0111 entire thing
or fllhole, which ht had fo frequently complain'd of in. others~
or why this does not destroy the supposition as much·
as a fir;JJ and /aft, I cannot apprehend.

· (P. 120.) He endeayours to invalidate the old Maxim;
that " C•fa is prislt' to its Ejfeil, by a distinaion between
priority;,, tbt order of 011r Ide111 and priority;,, nature. "For
,.., as Dr. Cltwlte fays, Light would eternally proceed from
" the Sun, or an impresiion from an· imposed Seal, were
" their Causes Eternal. In the fame manner created Beings
" might eternally f pring from the workmanthip of the Al"
mighty, as Light from the Sun." Anf. Whatever is necessarily
prior in the order of our Ideas, is for that reason
prior also in the order of Nature, if we have any knowledge
at all of Nature : or can prove any thing from our Ideas
coneerning it. Every mruer must be previous to the '1lfl'Uttl
as well in NatUre as in Idea, though it cou'd not be properly
a mover till it produced some motion. In like man- ·
ner as the Sun could not be what we now stile Su• tilt it
emitted Light., but yet the matter of it, as wen as the mo-·
lion excited in its parts, must be previous (except you will
ilppo&: it self motive) both in Nature arid Time to the affual
Emission of these parts which cause the Idea of Light,
and which require some time for every Motion : i. e. their
Motion is not instantaneous, and consequently Light., which
is the eftCct thereof, cannot be Lbialy coetancous with the
Sun. Your Father was no Father indeed till he had a fon,.
but will you fay that his fon and he might possibly hiwc
been coeval ~ The contrmissionary is intuitively certain, and he
that will demand a proof of it, or a reason why it is fo, docs
not know-when he ought to be·convine'd.· ·
What
Wlaat h«t bri111P in .the following pages- coneerning V...
wipotmce and the Unity, has been confidir'd in R.g. 2d Ed.
(P.124.) He coneludes" What the Transiator fay, about
<c Necejfity of aisle11Ce is me~ trisling and ought not to be
cc confida'd at all. As if wiifonnity acluded at:Uibutes. of
cc different kinds."

:4/lfohtteNecflfity, in the fensc it is some times used, wowd
defhoy all variety or Jiwerjity of every kind, as Dr. Clarici
endeayours to prove in the 6th prop. p.72. 2d Ed. And
it may exclude au diversity of peisettions in the Divine Nature
for the very fame reason that it does exclude a diJferenee
of Prrfa11S, which was perhaps the reafoµ. of its being
first introduced. Though in truth 'ti$ such a ·vague eqwvocal
pri11ciple that it will be hard to -~ posttively what
it may or may not do. . .

Thefe few cursory Remarks may fussicc at presen,t ~
point out the ineonclu.fivenefs of this Gentleman's chies ar~
cnts, fo far as they coneern the Notes on ~' King.
If any thing material have been omitted, it will be amply
supply'd in a Controyersy which is thortly cxpcaed on ~
failie Su~efu with .a f;ertain celehrated Writer, who has
promis'd to amfider them: (a) and who, 'tis hoped, will
not think himklf anticipated by this Gentleman's perform-
2nce. •

(~) Ca1pergamumn.r no Conviaion &c. p. the lafl. This was performed l1
che Rev. Mr. 711df•, in hit E:itift111t1 lliltiU•ilJ• &c. 1734. and answer·'.4
ia Ao EapirJ ;,,,. tb1 ltk~1 •f Spati, 'Iimt, &c. to whicla is aflnex'd a
Di.lfn-ttzliot1 .,, tbt 4rg-t•I 4 priori. A regular account of the wl&ole
controyersf may be feea in the Gm""' Dillitn1•1'• V. 4. An. C/4rh.
Note 1. p. 3;S. excepting Mr. Y«'fm's Defence Of hH Book oocicW
illij111K1.UUlli1], 17JS· which ended chc Debaie.

INDEX
INDEX to the NO.TES.
A. ABsalute Infinity what it is . .;.-pag.14,. 88, 89 .
.Absalute .Necessity an absurd Term, 19, 20, 2 1. cannot
be the ground of the Divine Existence, ib. and 67,
68. &c. The fame as Cause ib. cannot be applied to the
Rdations of things 261-264. 269, 270. ineonsistent
with the Divine Freedom and diversity of Attributes,
49. cannpt be· urg'd a priori. ib.
Abftratl Ideas what. 5. of Substanees, Modes and Rdations.
5, 6, 7. how made ib. not form'd-by Analogy. 7.
have no objeaive reality. 45. are positive and adequate.ib •
.Accidents how to be distinguiih'd from Substanee. 3 •
.Atfion twosold. 211. 2·26. cannot be necessmissionary in either sense..
ib. whether all hpergamuman Liberty consists in it. 110,.21 1.
· -222,&c •
.AOiw Powers two. 208, 209. 220 .
.Adam whether naturally mortal. 131. 136. 151. 189. whether
his Powers were diff~rent from those of his Po~
· ft:erity ib. and 361. The Scheme of Providenee in his
Fall. 364, &c. 414, 415. His Happinefs not fo great as
that which is attainable by us' 417, 41 8.
Agents free, the necessity for such in the World. 346, 347 •
.Aiteration, there can be no partial one in this System for
the better. 123. 146, &c. a total orie ineonceivable. ibid~
The fame may be 1hewn in the moral World. 424. 43 1. ·
.Alternative of Good and Evil necessmissionary to improve our
Happinefs. 110, 111. 396, &c. If we were incapable of
the:. one we could not attain to fo high a Degree of the
other, ib. and 367. 397, &c. a general Anfwer to Bay/e's
Objecoons. 366, &c .
.Analogy not to be apply'd to the whole Nature of the Divine
Attributes, but only to the Modus of them. 79, 8<>-98.
applieable to the 'l'rinity. 104, 105. 88. to Prescience. 392 •
.Angels, why we were not made as persea as they. 119, 120.
· whether they still have freedom of Will. 355, 356. some
ReaiOns ·why their FaH might be permitted. 358, &c.
399, 400. 425, 426. vide FaO.
.AnteJlldatltit
~ty not the ground of the Divine Existence.
31,32.6~,69. Nor of.the R.e/aJionsof things. 261.
~6J,26+.269. The very fame as Cause. 68. in no sense
capable of being constdered 4 priori. ii>. and 49. Whether
any Relations of things are properly antecedmt·. to
the Will of God. 2~7,268, &c.. · _ :
Aiutitty, in what Scnfc it may be Mid to· determine the Will.
2'23,224 .. does not determine itphysically. 208.209. generallyconfCquent
upon its determination. 223,22.+,*22~
225. .
.Appmtu, may be oppoid and overeome by the Will alone..
294.3_00. . , . .
Jrbitr.ory in what Senfe the Divine Will is .fo. 7~, 7 1. 2 55~
268,269.276,277. this ineonststent with the Notion of
absolute antea:dent Necessity. 69,70.~12. · · .. '
.4rgtl1111111 a priori, cannot be applied to the Divine Being ..
48, 49, 50, 51. 67, 68, 69. in what Senfe the Author .argues
II priori~ 58, · ·,
Attrilliltn of God primmissionary and secondmissionary. 45. how we gee
ourldeasofthem. 80,81. notfrom.Ana/v. 81,82,-88.·
Not capable of being proved a priori. 48.67.271,&c.-
B.
Bei11g of God, proof of it. 42,43,44-t &c. _... ~
Beings, whether all ought to have been created at .first in the
highest: Degree they are capable of. 108,109,110. Argpergamuments
for the affirmati:ve. 108. Anfwer. 111,112.-.
114. Scale of them. 117,n8,119.
Body must necefilully asseCl: the Soul. 155,156.-162. its.
Pains unavoidable. i!Jid. .
Botmds, why we can fet none to Space,N11mller, Dwation, &c.
n .-17. this docs not infer their absolute Infinity. #lid.
c.
C.Wmijls, the consequenees Or their belieying themselyes to
be ~y ~et~ned. 366, 367.
Cha11c~, the Will~ determined by it. ,100, 301. the Author's
notion of ~_berty different fi:om it. ib. and 2.48. .
Chang,_, every one requires a Ca"ft· 66,67~ There could be
none in this System for the better. 124,125. 146,147,148.
N n Cb11fm,
•
ChtJjm, none in the Chain of Beings. 117,118,119.u7.-
128.
Cboice, most of our happindS constfts in it. 216. - 220, &e.
is under limitations as to its Exercife. 117,218. 2+h2.4!·
23~ z33. the.Foundation of all Merit. 249.
Cla.ffes of Beings down from God to.nothing. 117,i.18. Il·
. Juftrationofit. 119.121.140,141. the necessity for such~
127,128.394.-402. Anfwer to Bay/e's Obj~on. ib.
Comparisans, the impropriety of those of Ba]k coneerning
Free-Will. 431.-434. •
C.pu!fton, freedom from it not fuflicient to c~ftitute moral
Libeny. 209, 210.
Cmftimee of Guilt and Mifery very distinCl: percq>tions. 292,
293. 'tis impossible to have a guilty Conscience without
Liberty, ib. the Confdenee of having used our Libeny
aright is the source of all our Happinefs. 366,367,
368.
Conftiousnefs of Liberty proves that we are absolutely free.
•222,•H3.289,2.90. whether all Men have it. 366.
Conftquenees of certain Ad:ions not sufficient to excuse the
doing of them. 413, &c·.
Contingeney_ as certain to the Divine Knowledge as N ecessity.
392. .
Contingent ACl:ions may be objeCl:s of che Divine Knowledge.
ibid.
Continuance an abftraa: Idea. 6. how aequired. ibid.
Corruptibility a necessmissionary consequenee of Materiality. 131,
132. 150,151,152,153.
Corruption a consequenee of the Fall. 131,132.152,153.
Creation did not add to the Divine Happinefs or Perseetion •
53,54. why no sooner. ibid. the Efsect of Goodnefs. 56,
· 57. in what sense it was indifferent to God. 266.-275. ·
Creatures not all made for the use of Man. 117;118. hue
for each others Happinefs. ib. and 122. -126. none
could be al>Wlucely perfcCl:, 103. whether all ought to
have been made equally persect, 108, &c. 117, &c. I 19,
120. 399, &c. or absolutely fixed in any Degree of Perse&
on, 109. Objections answered~ ib. aiteration and enerease
needsmissionary to their Happinefs. 111.-115. 398.
Death,
D.
beath, a ncccstmissionary Confequcnce of the general Laws at
Natore, 131,132.150,151. could not have been pre-a
venud naturally in Paradise. 150, 151, r 52,153; 189-191.
the Fear of it ncccstmissionary. 158.-162.177. of great benefit
to the World, i/J. is not the occasion of our fondnci
· of Life. 405., &e.
befe!I, whence this Evil arises, 116. whether all Defca: ~
· require a Cause. 71,72. ·
1Jtgree infinite, what is to be understood by it. 89,90.
Degrees oi Being and Perfcaion. 107.116,117,118. Ne·
· ceflity for them. 124.127.129.
1Jlftrt founded in Choice, 248, 249.352. the Plealbre attending
it. 367,368. .
Defire the fame with volition, 226. cannot be opposed to it •
. 227. .
Dl'Uil, the manner in which he may iilfluenceMankind.378 ..
380.
Distafts unavoidable. 131, 132 .155. Pains of them needsmissionary
in the present State. 156.-162.
Dijla11te lessens the Efsects of either Pleasures or Pains. 406,
. &c.
Duration an abilraa: Idea, 6.61,62. how formed,. i/J. norapplieable
to the! Deity, 69, 70. incapable of absolute In•
.finity. 14-JIS· 71.72.
E.
Bartl?, the advantages of its prdi:nt Figure. 167, 168. Si·
. tuation. i/J. Motion, Inclination of its Axis and Paralle·
lifm. i/J. and 169 .
.Bartb<J.italees, the Causea of them. 170, 171.
~ti, how far free,_355,356.362~363. the real'on of the
· DistinClion between them and the reft of Mankind. 3 64.
400,401.
Eltshon makes things~. 216.-220.331.,g32. .
Nfanee what, 5, 8_4. EflCnces of things in what sense arbi·
trmissionary. 255,256.
Etmllll, something must be fo. 43, 44. every thing could
not be fo. 70. this System co~d not. i/J. and 21, 22. whc·
ther the Matter of it was fo an useless CoDCl'CWerfy. ib.
N n 2 Eternal
E11rtl41·'.f"'tbs, the meaning· of these words. 76. 269. in
what afe the Relations of things .are fo. 2 56 .
Etmnty not· m«de yp of successive ·11aration. 6o~6i. acii
instantaneous. 62;63. the meaning o( that Attriwie. (i1.
63.f6. - . . . . . .
E'llil natural and moras, the Olt\inaion between them. 2,~ 3,
284. one a consequenee of the othel. 45.8.fi. how far
cithc:r is ps;edominant in the World. t $ 3i :i S+ .
Evil Prinaplt, the manich1an notion o( it •. 94· Th~ abf(lr;
dity of such a f.Upposition •. 99, 9.6'. Does not answer the
End· ptopo{ed by it. 97. The Creation. cannot! be 9wmg
to it. 96. The Argpergamument for it propose'd at lengdt. 94;
9~ . . . . .
l.'lJiJs of Life, whether they ever ~ the &nefits of ii:
1~8,._189- whether they generally do io~ 405. -41e.
whethef the moral ones do. 420.-414. Natural ones tn-·
feparable from Matter. 1.31,132.1551-162.
bi)'me1, our own idt-evident. 58. the abfUrdity ot at-
.. te1J1pting to prove it. ib. . . . . ~
Expansion cannot be ap~cil to the. beity. 33-· . either cardei
rl\e fame Idea with Extensiori or none at an:. ib; · -
bpmmce, whether we have any of Liberty. 288.-240:
318~ . . . .
E~te1flu11 npt !!pplieab~e. t~ the Peity, 33,,34. nor to any
immaterial Being. "ib. incapable' of Simplicity or _abfoiute
Infinity. ib. .
F;
Pll&Ulilli ntt~cl to the l'satures of things, 147~ 14&. 26;. •.
26~::· .. ·. . ; . .
Fall of Man, confeque~ces o_f it. 189.~191. Autliot~ t'hat
treat ofit.199,ioo. Necessity for it in die Scheme Of Pf0-
vi8.ent~. 361,..;..:..g64;399. &r. the advarttages arlfmg t9
Mlti\l<.ind front· it, iu. and to tac· whole €rcatien. 3' 3.
399, 400, &c. Objeaions answered, ib. and 4r4.4i~ _
Fear of Dblth _necellilty. 158.-· 162·.177. of greit ·beliem
tc> the World: "ib~ -a proof ·that Life is -iery desireable;
4Q5.-+10. ' ' . . ·,
Ferin'nltation the Cau(e of Eltrthquakes, Sror~s, Thun~fi
&,:·170,17r. · ·· ·
......' .·. - . . . r~l-,6- -..." ,. ·.·•
ffpl-1 of .die Eartk, dlC advantages of die present". i"~ . ....;
.. 1,.69. . . .. . '
Fil in in itself, aR -impnc;>per EKpression. 19, 20. what it
Jhould mean. 7 5.-78.
Fitnefs of things, wh~t this ough~ .to ll)ean. 46. 7 5. 2().9. f.
relative Term. '1.-J. ·'17· in what sense eternal .410d im.mutable.
;;. SAd 266.~ 71. in no sense antec~ent ~o the
Will of.GOO.. ib. afld 259. f5c. 'V. R1/atiqn1.
Jiltufi·.ot"things to Fa.culties. 1+7, 148.295.
l'#eltnWJl1dgt an -improperterm when appli~ to the Dci.ty.
' -6'. 392 • . - . .
P,1edo. of God, -p~ of it. #·of Man. 310, fie. 'Viele
Lillwty. . · ·
6'1e-Will, die meaning of those w:oJ'.<!ls. uo, &c. 'V. '/YiU.
G.
General :Ideas, what ·they are. 5. of Substanees, Modes an<;i
· R.-elations. 6,7. how formed. ih. not made by ,Analogy.
· 7. have no Archetypes, ·f'!)r any Existence bu~ _in ~e
min4-.ib. are positive, a~equate and universal. i!J. ·
Genw11ti8111 infinite, impoRible. 58, 59. the reason for fuccefl'we
ones in die World. 402. · ·
Gl1ry of God. -whac: these ·words mean, 56,57. I:>efire· of
Glory applied to God by way of accommodation. · i/Jid..
how God may be said to do all things for his own Glocy ~
• · 5 5. this coincident with the Happind's of Mankind. i/J.
God, a relative-tenn. 72. •_Froof of'his Existence .an~ .attri-
. 'butes. 42.-49. · .·
~:is that which proeuces Happineii 75. nothing _good
or evil in itself. i!J. and'! 17~ does not absolutely determine
the Choice. 216, &c. 350,351. natural Good the
foundation of.moral. 75,76,77.281, &c. nothing made
fo good but that it might· :bC:supp0fed better. 259.-264.
GOOd prepolient in the present World. 4-20.-. 424. ·
GiOM(s; ·Div,ine,.the meaning of it. 266. proofs of it.' 47,
- 46~ inclydes all -!he meral attributes, ib. the reason of
the Creation. 5-6,57.424, &~. this no ba,r to the 'l,)iv:~r:ie
Liberey-. i66, &c. this A~bute not capable of a proof
a priori. 271.
GO'OernG,
U,,,.,,,,,,, of the natural and moral World, the manner.
of it. 3 8 7, 3 8 a. 3 90. neither by pre-establijhetl Hart11011J,
nor particu/IJr Wills. ib, and 391, We.
H.
Habits, the strength of them. 451. the found~tion of our
Happinefs or Mifery in the next Life. 397, 454, 455,
456. Ufe and Applieation of this Doarlne. 454.
Ha-ppinest, fenlitive and intelleChial capable of perpetual Encrcafe,
108.-114, requires ap Alternative: 114. arises
from past desects. 113. Objeffions answered. ill. whether
there ~ht have been more in the present Syft¢m. 1 u.
123, &t. why not communieated immediately and all
at once. 398, &e. whether the Spergamum of it exceeds that
of misery in this World. 409,410.420,.p.1, &e. whether
it will do fo in the next. 425, £$&. foun~ chiesly
in Virtue, 355.427,428. and EleCijon. 346,347,
Hell-torments, the Authors who have treated on the Eter·
nity of them. 44 7. according to some they don' (can
capable of any other End bestde the Annihilation of die
Subjctb of them. 454.-456. have a natural foundation
jn the evil Habits contraelect in this Life. 398, ~'· 441,
"442· 451. the Ufes to which they may serve. 426.
427.448.
Holinest of God. 4 7 .
. Holy Ghost, ip what manner it influences the miRd. 3'1.6, {$t.
ihis not deftrqaive of our natural Powers. 378. but ra ..
ther am.sting and restoring them. ib •. in what w-y we
may concejve this Influence tQ ~ ~e4~ 379, 380,
not properly rpiracu/otu. 388. ·
I.
IJea, what the Autho,r means by that word. 8,
JJea of God, whether it proves his Existence. 49, 50.
Jewish N.?-pon, the manner of God's f>Verni~ them, 360,
Immutability Qf God. 44. of the Relatjons of things. 269. -
271, &~ . 1,;J&.
/mpersesho11, whence it arises, 116. whether properly &fl
,. ~viJ. 12~.-,26. why per~ttcd. 127, 1~8.
~- 1 •IJi
,I.,,,{sophysical,cannot be apphechothe Will. 358. what kind
oflmpulse confdl:ent with its freedom. 378, f.ic. 385. ·
Jncli111ilion of the Earth's Axis. 169.
Independenee. 43. the fame with self existence. 67,68. does
not strictly infer Unity. 72, 73.
Indifferenee, the Author's notion of it. 237,238.328. cannot
be applied to the whole Man, but only the Powers
of willing aad acting. ib. in what sense a blind Principle.
328.301. not applieable to Perception or Judgment,
208. must be applied to the Will, 310. &c. the benefit
of it. 310-314,296,&c. 260,&c. 327.
Indifferent, in what sense the Creation was fo to God. 159.-
266. this consistent with his being determined by his
Goodnefs. ib.
Indifferent Actions prove that the Mind determines itself.
•221, •222. lnstanees of such. ib.
Infinite, what is meant by that word. 14,17.88,89. the
fame as Perse&lion. ib. the Idea of it po.fi:tive, ib. and
previous to that of finite. ib. how it differs 'from a Mathematical
Infinite, 17. all ~antity, or that wluch constfts
of parts incapable of it. 15, &c.
Infinite Degree, what is to be understood by it. 89,90, the
fame~ persect. ib.
Infinit1 Series, the abfordity of it, 43. in Generations, 58.-
60. in, Npergamum~r, Motion, Magnitude, &c. 14. in successive
Duration. 60. has no Whole. 4 3.
lnjlinsl, none innate. 79.
lntelle&I, fee Knowledge.
lntercourse of Creatures with each other unavoidable. 12 2.-
126.
Judgment, always passive, 209. does not determine the Will.
208.-2 IO. •222, •223.296.-30 I.
Jujlice Divine, proof of it. 147. infinite Juftice not ineonststent
with infinite Mercy. 90, 91. . ·
Juftice .punitive, what it means, 90. cannot be said to i;>'blige
or demand any thing. ib. ·
K.
Knowledge, wl\at Kind and Degree of it heft suited to ou.r
State. 147, 1-48. the Pleafores ofit whenc;ederived. 113.
N n f Lt1bou1",
L.
Lah011r, the Necessity and Advantage of it both to Bady -
and Mind. 172, 173.
[.,JJ/,lalitita, his Anfwer to the Objeaion of Epi&ID'WI. of.35·
Laws Divine, the Design of them. 441,442. they are Dedarations
«the Natural Effe& of Sin, and Dir«lioaa to
avoid them. iJJ. they do.not bring us into a wwfe Sr.ate
than we~ should have been in without them11 ;j. -Of no
fort:e without Sanaions. 77, 7 8. 181. the dilml'mce between
natural and pofltive Laws. 2~ 255. whicll may
be dispensed with. 282,283. .
/A.'11Js ofNature, the Necessity for fOme cstabllihcd ones iR
the 11at11r.t World .. 13..,.13.5. the wikiom of- such an
Establifbment. 182. 358. 376. the fame .in the .,.."/
World. 358. the ill confequenoes that would -.d t8e
contrmissionary. ih. Yet theii: are not left entirely to tbmiselns.
376, 3 77. the Divine Iaterpol.itio.- fwnetimes nc>
ccfiiry, and the natW"eof it. 42..., &c. 381, &c.
Li/Jerty &ewn to belong to God# aad also to Mmt 31 o.
&c. vide Will. Dr. CillrUs argpergamument for it iamoclu&lc.
:z.28,229. whether we exp!rimee it in -oursdvo .. 288.-
290. 310.-31.~. we are conscioua of it before we try it.
•223. the different Notions of it. 208. applieable taV1lition
as well as.A/lion. 209.220.335,J36. die pQf)ibility •
. 312 .• -JI+ the Value ofit. 21-6.-220.2'6.110.-~13.326,
• 327.335.355. lneonveoiencies that would attend the..
want ofit. 346,347. or the over-ruling it on puticular
occasions. 358.361.-364.366.-368. even dte abu1t .of
it tends to the good df tlte whole. 4-1 !• &c.
Lift, u much in the World as it is capable of. i 20, 121.
125'126.1397140.1-66. the present Life better t!haanonexistence.
190.40§. why f0 desirable. 406.407. what 4efire
of ii: JaWful. 4f.04; whether most persons would nor
choose to live their Lives over~ -408.-410.
Litllitotin of aJl'1 .Attribute iB the JJeity an EffeB: Without
a Cause. 71,72. . ·
M.
Matula Peceati, the ttucmeani~oftheseWords. 454'455·
Miln, why mt niade mare persea. u 7.119.122, &c. 39'h
&c. Uf piamlia 1lhls World. ill. Head of die ·lower
. . part
pm eitheC..•. u7.1~.&c • ..U things net. made
for his immediate Ufe, but to enjoy themkl~es and be
subservient to eaca otliler. i/J. - ·
MAnicbees, their Notiori of aa .evil Principle.~· dte •
surdity of it. 95,96. Creation not owing to it. 95. the
ufddinefs of such a Suppefition. 101,102. the Argpergamument
ior tt. ad.A1idJors~ 1mve ttealed of«. ,.,_~6.
Mtmner of existence distintl: frOm the abftraa: ll8IUPe d any
thing. lj. 81. . . . .
Ml/II' ·~irom Bait m1, .an abftnel: idea..,.,
5. in vain to dispute about its Eternity. 22 • .incapable of
Sdf-Motion. 32.,33,.&c. uo,uu .. UseatGf it ia _its ptt·
sent;.Stat.e. ;j .. whf mt .made .marepe*a. @. the ~
of natural Evils. 1-a1.1s2.
Ai1""11tiolll H~, .an aamnt .m it. '!9'· a Confuta.
• ... of jt. 1M9· 390·
MllimlJ, dle Sdlcmc ip-..neGI a,, the·.Aauthor. ~1, zoz.
Divine Ji.,Jgmreq .n• aa:apuuo;it. 11.z.
MiJr" :mt ~9.iuh:iafiliite jasticc. -90.
Mn '-idocl in Choice. 2..,B.. .
Mij,,., che ptd"ait'\lUYGidable. ay3• nit di» S-t D ·plC.
ral as Happin~ in this Lif~ ~ .. <41fO. g9z. nor in .the
oat. ¢.,427, &c. w1i:crher .that -DC the .danmcd may be
conceived to inerease the Haaliness..of.the bldfed.41.·7,.&c •
. Mmwl iA.ttributes -cmrain, thmJ8h. SJt apible of fula 'Demoadln.
ti.on. 45~6. nerd.any Psoo(ap,.;m. 2'70>,"271.
in what fcnfc diey -~ aoniqUeaces .of ·the -natural Attributes.
i/J.
MPral good and evil consists in producing natural good and
on. '4i- and 7'5·?6·.28'1. Ge dittina:icm .be&waen,·.chem •
. 281.-284 •.
Moral Obligation, the.time fcmndatimi .Gfit. ;i',71 . .182.~
284.
}AQral Se~ 11len:c Jctemiines m :to~·GJf doing >good
to Gthma. 1'5· rthe fame with 'CCilllscieooe. ib.. ,~ot ·innate
. QI' ilnplallb:d in m. 7,. . . . .
Mortality, whether a Consequenee of Ma11a~, FJT_, 152 .
. Igt>•-1'·3-3· whc:rJier-~ .furthis W.Qr}d. ~01.
}AQtives, whether the Mind be alw~s.deaermined by them.
169.-212.288.296.310,311. whether ever physically.
' 224. -
u4.-•223. in what fcnfe some arc calied jlrngw thua
others. 310. '
Jt-[Dtio• 9>uld not be from Eternity. 14. 21. 58.
Mmull~ins, uses of them. 144. · ·
N.
Natural Evils, whether inseparable from Matter. 131, CS c
• 155-162. -
· Nature of any thing, what meant by it. 84. distinB: from
the Modus ofits Existence. ib. and 87. Laws. of Nature,·
vide Laws. . .
Neeejfo. ry, always a relative Term. 19-21. appl(d to
Means, CJ'ruth or &iftmce. i/J. necessiuy in itseff or absolutely
such, improper Expreslions. i/J. . .
Neetf/ilry Existence, what it means. 19. the fame as Self exifu:
nce or Independenee. 61, 62, how prov'd i/J. cannot
be understood positively. i/J. nor ura'd to prove any thing
a priori. 5~ 53. 69. built upon a ialfe Maxim. 70, 71.
Needfity, ineonststent with the Powers of willing and at\:ing.
21 1, 2 I 2. whether the perceiving none in our Aaions be
a proof that there is none. 288-290. whether it can be
apply'd to the Will in any Senfe. 296-301.
Notbi111, in what sense things arose from it. 116. this cau~
fes the evil of Defetl:. JI 7, II 8.
Nfl'Oe/ty, an improyement of our Happinm. 111-113. .
Npergamum/Jer, why we cannot fet bounds to it. 13, 14. this does
not prove it to be absolutely infini~, i6. and 16, 17.
0.
O/Jliglllin, what the Word signities. 78, whence moral O~
ligation arises, i/J. and 272, 273.
O/Jfli""'Y, ~hat it is founded in. 304, 305,
Ocean, uses ofit. 144.
Oapotentt proved.#· does notimply Unity. 7i.
Owmiprese11ce, what it means. 74, 75. not to beconceiv'd by
way Of Extension, i/J. with what sense it can be said to
fill all Space. ib. .
Otmzifcimee. 45. proofs of it. 392. Contingeneies may be
proper o~ of it. ;;,;4. . .
,. Orller•
Ortlers different. 107. 117, 118. 1n, 12). 398, 399· 121,
12.8. 1#, 145. make for the good of the whole. 402.
why not more of the higher ones 117. 121. 128, 129. no
absolute highest. 259. 264.
Original Sin. w 1, 102.
-P. ,
P!zin, alt Beings join'd to Matter capable of it. 131, 132.
& c. 155. fJ c. the reason and nec~ty for our present pains.
146-148. 155.;....162. could not be prevented. ib. We
do not always defll'C to remove it. 225. . .
Parmlift, the differenee between that State and the present.
i31, &c. 155, 156. 415, &c. No Argpergamuments can be
drawn from that, or the state of Angels and bletsed in
Heaven, against the goodness of the present System. 132.
155. 356. -
Plll'11lltlif111 of the Earth, the advantages of it. : l 68, 169.
Particular Providenee, the necessity for it. 389-392. the
JJllllllCl in which we may suppose it to be exerted. ib.
Parlit!dar Wills, the Deity dOes not aa: by them in the
government of either the natural or moral World. 358.
572, 373' yet his Interpo1ition is sometimes necessmissionary.
389, &c.
Parts, that which confdl~ of them incapable of Infinity. 25~
16. in what sense yards, feet, years, days, &c. are no•
ffUI ~of Space and Time. 16, 17.
P".l/ions, the Ufes and necefii.ty' of them·. 155, &c •
. Perse!J.~ J)O CJ"C&ture can be (uch. 103. whether all ought to ·
have the fame r>t;,oreeof PerseCD.on. 108. 117, &c. whether
all ought to be fix'd in one certain Degree. 108, &c.
Argpergamument,5Jor the affirmative. 108, 109. Anfwer, 110,
111. why they an= not more persea. 122, &c.
Perf1tJ#n, the fame with absolute Infinity. 14' 25, 88. that
of €reanires how to be estimated. 121, &c.
Pleafares sensible and intellethtal suited to our present State.
147, 148 •
. Poifons. 18 5.
f ofitiive Idea does not· infer an external /Jeatpergamum. · 1 o, 1 r.
positive Infinite what. 15. 88. howdistil,lgUifh'd from the
negaii¥e on~. 15, 16t 17. 89, 90. pofifive Law~ how.
fiiffi,.n~'d from na.J lll"al ... 2 54. , 2 55. Pojp.
l'ojfi/JifilJ, -n• -~ from idaite ~ d:w£ a
·Power aauallyexistswhidl mn essea·the111. 49, 51.
POfVtrs of the Mind aiOft and fJll!i.:ve. 2~, '2 IG.
p,.IZ)tr, the natural good EffatiS -Oftt ;Ypen QU" Minds. 3f I.
God's end in requiring it, 382.·itia ~y -auWnl
Duty. i/J. th~ Efficacy of it. !76, &c. 38.z. of no use without
a particular Providenee. ill. .
Pretleshutin. 386--391.
Pre-ejlablijlJJ Harmony, an accoont oftthat s,.stem. g66.
&c. ineonsdl:ent with·'fe En& ofReJigien. 3~8-391.
Prefainee of God, an impmper term. 66. ·What 1hQ.YW •
meant by it. 392.
f'rt'Ualmty of moral Good in this WerW. 420, 4~ 1 •. f!/e.
Pr~,,atirm, .the NeceRity for (uch .a State. in .er4cr .co improve
our Happinefs. 396. 401, &c. 434.
Prfl'Vi4nlce, the manner Of its go¥emment ef 4'ol!h. :tihe na ..
· rural and .moral W-0.dd. !n2, 373. 3*9--g92. che·ldies
of a partiatlar one neceAit17·to .most Dlttit!s oftR.clli~Oll. -ib.
PunijhtM11ts,. the benefits of dtCJJl in ·this Life. ·IS 2. ~
from infinit~ Goodncls. i/J.
R..
Reaf,,,,, ~he.therwecan will without one. 216. 219 .. z~. (de.
· the benefits of such a Power. 305. ·
'Reafons of things, ·'Yide ReliZti1tu.
Relations of thin!lS, what · f.heuld ·be unc.{J!rstood by .fhc,m.
7 5, 76. not to~ chosen for their ewa .fak~, # . .in ·what
sense diey are immutable and er.emid. fl!. and ~69, 21·1.
not antecedent to, or independent ~the Will of God. ib.
and 15 •. &c.259,27a; ~-e. not·needsmissionary te·the d.oteRnination
&c. of it. 268, lie. 2.66, &-e.·2.,0, &c . .slidir ~cdlity
only hypothetical and .subsequent. ·to the Creation~ ind. It
does not from ·hence ·follow that ·God ·may ·alt« -them
while the Creation continues.254, f.4c .. .,,f,f,-271. -Meral '
Obligation cannot ilrife:from them. 26'-11:71-z16.
s.
Sc1,1/e .of .Beings -necessmissionary for the.good of the1hlnivorfe. ·l•J 7,
u8. ·127, 1~-8. 39~ &t.-398,.Cic.
&npttn, Objections from it conceming ·tke l'•il,&& ... -of.no
force. 393. ·. ·
3 &lfSI/{
.... : what it meanJ. '1-'71.hew ptoyed •. ;j,··tht
fame widJ.. In4cpmdcncc. 41• dee& ftOt ftrittJy infer
vtfrtr/ I i '/n .
illj-dlMftlllr; ~· 192.· what Ghieslf ptvaiss it. 407,
408, &&. neither want of Co~ feu of Dadt or of
J;)lintJaeion; *"· ..
Smft, moral not Innate. 79·
~ infidise. 43• fSt flit.- .
S#ltf'Jlm, iocompa8Wct widl Extensaon. Z+-2 7. er Ezpmfion.
~J· .
Si11, why per.miaed. 41a. 431, f6t. answer te Bt1J#'s Obje&
iom. ib. Original 101, .ioz. . , .
Siliitllin of the Eitth, ad~ of dte pres~. 187.
Sf/llJ neilesl'arilj asse&d by the BOdy. 155-16lt • .nea:ftity
h 1lhe prcfc!nt Liwt of Union between Ghan. aitl.
Sp«e, an abftraa Idea. 6, not capable (){ abfOlurd InfiRity.
12, 13. why we cannot fet bounds to it. 0,, various ways
of conceiving it. 10. 13. ~· 39.· _a positive Idea of it does
iKd infer.~ 10. •Mther ii - ., pOfiti~ J>ro.'
perties. 1 1. ineonsi.stent with funplicity. :i+ 27. or the naCUA!.
Gt p\ft Spir!t. 31. ~3· not ntCe8'alilt dfi:ent. w:
may be an supposed away, but noc annihilated by patts.
~7- 38. tlo imaginatf lubftrmun of ab~ Ext~:
39. different :iOJn the Idea of a vacupergamum. z3. 2..,.. why fo
~ toliinuided with ic ;j, with what ftrtfc it can be af.•
finn'd that the Deity is.ptdene to au partu~f i(. 74' 75·
Spirit, not extended. 31, 32.
sp;n11 good artd bad, tilt manner of theit I~, 376-
380 ..
Storms, the Causes of them. 170. unavoidable. 171.
Bloi&al Fate, difment from that of the Author. 328.
S•IJ}Jmk4~ of BOdy and Spirit. 3. i~roperly fc:t to ngnify
the manner or Ca".fo of the union of P~es. 4. nothing
more than all the eJreritlal Qualities taken together, ;6. iri:
any other sense 'tis only an abftratl: Idea. i/J.
S~flratpergamum, an abftraet Idea. 4. partitulariy bdlG~ to Mat- ·
td. 31.
St«&ejfion, none in the Deity. 61, 62. &t. how this is cdn-.
fiient with the NotiGn of Eternity. ·;1.
&f//idnll Jtd>n or Cause for every thing~ a £6 Maidi.-
67. 79. ineonsistent with the Divine Liberty ,i/J. & 29~2 ,- _
Stm1, whether that of HappinefS ~the Swn of ·
in this World. 405, &e. 411, (le. whether it will- do
in the next. 4241 fie'.
Stmlll#I• Bo111U11, the reason why Pbilofophers ~ fo uneertain
about it. ~ 30. .
S.fpadim, the power of it lhows that we are absolutely me
- to will or not to will in· any given cafe. 220. 2 32; 2 33. not
.founded in the general defll'C of Hai>enc:IS. i!J. nor diJFerent
from any other exereise of the Will, 233. ,
S,Jn11 what meant by cbe_best. 107. in what manner to be
. framed. i!J. whether any cou'd be infinite. 108. whethet
any absolute best and highest. 109. 259, &e. whether any
.fix'd in a cmain Degree. 117, &le. whethe&' tJie presCnt
might be improved. 118-120. '-53·
T.
!"~#, whether inc~c with £xrenGon and Oivifi ..
bility. 31-33.
-IbtaJtlw, the CaUfe of it. 170, 171. a necefiluy consequenee
. of the present Laws of Motion. i!J. •
time what, 61. not applieable to the Deity. 62, f$e. incapable
of absoluee Infinity. 16. 17,61, 62.
f"riol, necessity for one in Virtue, Labour, &c. 396, &c.
399, &c. advans:BgCS ofit. 432. ·
f"rimty, 104-106. .
f"ntb, in what it is founded.· 254. the ~ty ofit.75, 255.
~urpituJI of Vice, what to be understood by it. 282.- . v. .
'Y """""' different from Space. 2 3. 2 7. osten confounde4
with it. ib. argpergamuments used against it only when fo confounded.
241 &c.
Yariety, needsmissionary to improve our HappineiS. 111, 112. 396.
Yariety of Creatures. 139.
Yarious uses of most things in Nature. 145, &c •.
Yera&ity, or more properly Faithf11l11efs, a Divine Attribute.
47. -
Yi&e, its natural turpitude, what. 282. evil consequenees in
general. 283, 284. what wou'd be the cafe if it were:pre-
4 doauna.n~
' ~ ..iti
~
· dominant. ib. reason of its bemg fOrbiddCn. ;j. how it may
tend to the benefit ofthePublic. 413, 414. and theresore
be pennitted by the Deity; though it be neverthelefS punisliable.
i/J.
Yirlilt, the foUndation of our greatest Happinefs. 427, 428 ..
cannot be infused miraculpufiy or on a fuciden •. il1o & 396,
&c. produced o~y by Exercife and.Experience. 355· 425,
&c. 402. cannot subsist 1'thout Liberty. 354, &c. answer
toth~ Argpergamuments_ drawn from An~ls and Saints. ill~
why required Of us. 281, &c. 355. 364~
Unt:hangeaJJlmeft of God. 44. ·
·unJerjlandi11g, of G~ the foundation of Truth •. 254. how
it contains the Ideas of all things. 26o. &c. Uriderstanding
of Man, whether it detennines the Will. 296, &c.
this ineonsistent with Liberty. 298, &c. '
U11eaji11tfs in what sense it may be said to determine the Will.
· 223, vide .A.mtiety.
Union of Soul and Body, the consequenees of it. 155, &c.
Unity of God, argpergamuments for it. 45. an Explanation of them.
72, 73. cannot be strialy demonstrated. i/J.
Yolition i:listintt from Action. 208. the advantages ofsuch a
Power. 218, 219. 368. 323, &c. Ineonveniencies that
wou'd attend the want of it. 346. 3.f.8. 363, 364.
Ufes, many of almost every thing in Nature. 145.
w.
Will, Mr. Loc'ltt's first Definition of it. 220, 221. ineonsistent
with Experience. i/JiJ. its freedom from both Compulsion
and Necessity. 208-210. not properly determin'd
by any thing without itself. ib. and u 9. 2 21. nor by
Chance. 248, 249. can conquer all othu Appetites. 296-
301. creates Plea.fore in things by choosing them. 2 19, 2 20.
but cannot inerease the pleasure in infinitpergamum. 2 20. 244. 3 3 1.
its freedom stated and defended. 310. &c. how it may be
impair'd and retasy'd. 361, ~62. whether it is or can be
detennin'd to parti~ar Objed:s. 346, &c. the Confcquenees
that would attend such a Limitation of it. 3 5 2.
363. ora Sufpension of it. i64 ~+32, &c. the abuses of it
tend to the good of the whole. 424, &c. will constitute
the greatest part of our Happinefs in the next Life. 355,
356. answer to Bayle's ObJeCtions. i/JiJ, and 433, &c.
the

P I N I S.
f'
CAMBIUDGE,
Printed by J. BENTHAM ,rinter to the t1NTT!l.S1'tT.
M.~C.LVIII.
